Comparative Politics and the Synthetic Control
Method
Alberto Abadie Harvard University and NBER
Alexis Diamond International Finance Corporation
Jens Hainmueller Stanford University
In recent years, a widespread consensus has emerged about the necessity of establishing bridges between quantitative and
qualitative approaches to empirical research in political science. In this article, we discuss the use of the synthetic control
method as a way to bridge the quantitative/qualitative divide in comparative politics. The synthetic control method provides
a systematic way to choose comparison units in comparative case studies. This systematization opens the door to precise
quantitative inference in small-sample comparative studies, without precluding the application of qualitative approaches.
Borrowing the expression from Sidney Tarrow, the synthetic control method allows researchers to put “qualitative flesh on
quantitative bones.” We illustrate the main ideas behind the synthetic control method by estimating the economic impact
of the 1990 German reunification on West Germany.

S

tarting with Alexis de Toqueville’s Democracy in
America, comparative case studies have become
closely associated with empirical research in political science (Tarrow 2010). Comparative researchers
base their studies on meticulous description and analysis of the characteristics of a small number of selected
cases, as well as of their differences and similarities. By
carefully studying a small number of cases, comparative
researchers gather evidence at a level of granularity that
is difficult if not impossible to incorporate in quantitative studies, which tend to focus on larger samples but
employ much coarser descriptions of the sample units.1
However, large-sample quantitative methods are sometimes adopted because they provide precise numerical
results, which can be compared across studies, and because they are better adapted to traditional methods of
statistical inference.

As a result of a recent and important methodological debate (Beck 2010; Brady and Collier 2004; George
and Bennett 2005; King, Keohane, and Verba 1994; Ragin 1987; Tarrow 1995), a widespread consensus has
emerged about the necessity of establishing bridges between the quantitative and the qualitative approaches to
empirical research in political science. In particular, there
have been calls for the development and use of quantitative methods that complement and facilitate qualitative analysis in comparative studies (Gerring 2007;
Lieberman 2005; Sekhon 2004; Tarrow 1995, 2010). At
the other end of the methodological spectrum, a recent strand of the quantitative literature is advocating for
research designs that, like Mill’s Method of Difference,
carefully select comparison units to reduce biases in observational studies (Card and Krueger 1994; Rosenbaum
2005).

Alberto Abadie is Professor of Public Policy, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 79 John F. Kennedy Street,
Cambridge, MA 02138 (alberto˙abadie@harvard.edu). Alexis Diamond, International Finance Corporation, 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue,
NW, Washington, DC 20433 (ADiamond@ifc.org). Jens Hainmueller is Associate Professor, Department of Political Science and Graduate
School of Business, Stanford University, 616 Serra Street, Stanford, CA 94305 (jhain@stanford.edu).
We thank Neal Beck, Anthony Fowler, John Gerring, Adam Glynn, Danny Hidalgo, Kosuke Imai, Gary King, Hermann Maier, Teppei
Yamamoto, the editor, and four anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. The title of this
article pays homage to Lijphart (1971), one of the earliest and most influential studies on the methodology of the comparative
method in political science. Companion software developed by the authors (Synth package for MATLAB, R, and Stata) is available at
http://www.stanford.edu/ jhain. The data used in this study can be downloaded for purposes of replication from the AJPS Data Archive
on Dataverse (http://dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/ajps).
1

See Lijphart (1971), Collier (1993), Mahoney and Rueschemeyer (2003), George and Bennett (2005), and Gerring (2004, 2007) for careful
treatments of case study research in the social sciences.

American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 59, No. 2, April 2015, Pp. 495–510

C 2014,

Midwest Political Science Association

DOI: 10.1111/ajps.12116

495

496
In this article, we discuss how synthetic control methods (Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller 2010; Abadie
and Gardeazabal 2003) can be applied to complement
and facilitate comparative case studies in political science. Following Mill’s Method of Difference, we focus on
a study design based on the comparison of outcomes between units representing the case of interest, defined by
the occurrence of a specific event or intervention that is
the object of the study, and otherwise similar but unaffected units. In this design, comparison units are intended
to reproduce the counterfactual of the case of interest in
the absence of the event or intervention under scrutiny.2
The selection of comparison units is a step of crucial importance in comparative case studies because using inappropriate comparisons may lead to erroneous
conclusions. If comparison units are not sufficiently similar to the units representing the case of interest, then
any difference in outcomes between these two sets of
units may merely reflect disparities in their characteristics
(Geddes 2003; George and Bennett 2005; King, Keohane,
and Verba 1994). The synthetic control method provides
a systematic way to choose comparison units in comparative case studies. Formalizing the way comparison
units are chosen not only represents a way of systematizing comparative case studies (as advocated, among
others, by King, Keohane, and Verba 1994), but it also has
direct implications for inference. We demonstrate that
the main barrier to quantitative inference in comparative studies comes not from the small-sample nature of
the data, but from the absence of an explicit mechanism
that determines how comparison units are selected. By
carefully specifying how units are selected for the comparison group, the synthetic control method opens the
door to the possibility of precise quantitative inference in
comparative case studies, without precluding qualitative
approaches to the same data set.
One distinctive feature of comparative political science is that the units of analysis are often aggregate entities, such as countries or regions, for which suitable single
comparisons often do not exist (Collier 1993; George and
Bennett 2005; Gerring 2007; Lijphart 1971). The synthetic
control method is based on the premise that, when the
2

See Fearon (1991) for an early discussion of the role of counterfactuals to assess causal hypotheses in political science. It is important,
however, to recognize that comparative politics is “a river of many
currents” (Hall 2003, 374), and researchers may have motivations
for selecting cases other than the construction of counterfactuals
(Collier and Mahoney 1996; Hall 2003). For example, researchers
may select cases in order to examine causal mechanisms through
within-case methods such as process tracing (George and Bennett
2005) or causal process observations (Collier, Mahoney, and Seawright 2004). We do not intend to criticize these approaches, as in
our view our proposal is complementary to existing methods.

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

units of analysis are a few aggregate entities, a combination of comparison units (which we term “synthetic
control”) often does a better job of reproducing the characteristics of the unit or units representing the case of
interest than any single comparison unit alone. Motivated by this consideration, the comparison unit in the
synthetic control method is selected as the weighted average of all potential comparison units that best resembles
the characteristics of the case of interest.
Relative to regression-based comparative case studies, the synthetic control method has important advantages. Using a weighted average of units as a comparison precludes the type of model-dependent extrapolation
that regression results are often based on (King and Zeng
2006). Below we show that a regression estimator can
also be expressed as a weighted average of comparison
units, with weights that sum to one. However, regression
weights are not restricted to lie between zero and one,
allowing extrapolation. Moreover, in contrast to regression analysis techniques, the synthetic control method
makes explicit the contribution of each comparison unit
to the counterfactual of interest. This allows researchers
to use quantitative and qualitative techniques to analyze
similarities and differences between the unit or units representing the case of interest and the synthetic control.
We apply the synthetic control method to estimate
the economic impact of the 1990 German reunification
on West Germany. This example illustrates the potential
gains derived by using synthetic controls in comparative case studies. We show that no single country is able
to closely approximate the values of economic growth
predictors for West Germany before the reunification.
However, a weighted average of a few OECD countries,
namely, Austria, the United States, Japan, Switzerland,
and the Netherlands, provides a very close approximation to West Germany prior to 1990. We also show that,
in this example, a regression-based analysis relies on extrapolation to construct a comparison unit, whereas the
synthetic control method avoids extrapolation. Our results suggest that reunification had a pronounced negative effect on West German income, with gross domestic
product (GDP) per capita being reduced by about 1,600
U.S. dollars per year on average over the 1990–2003 period (approximately 8% of the 1990 baseline level). The
findings are robust across a series of placebo studies and
sensitivity checks.
In this section, we have briefly described the synthetic
control method and motivated the use of this method in
comparative case studies. Relative to small-sample studies, the synthetic control method helps in the selection of
comparison cases and opens the door to quantitative inference. Relative to large-sample regression-based studies,

497

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

the synthetic control method avoids extrapolation biases
and allows a more focused description and analysis of the
similarities and differences between the case of interest
and the comparison unit.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. The
next section describes the synthetic control estimator,
provides a formal comparison between this estimator and
a conventional regression estimator, discusses inferential
techniques, and provides recommendations for empirical
practice. We then present an empirical application where
we apply the synthetic control method to the study of
the economic effects of the 1990 German reunification in
West Germany. The last section concludes. Data sources
for the empirical example are provided in an appendix.

Synthetic Control Method for
Comparative Case Studies
Suppose that there is a sample of J + 1 units (e.g., countries) indexed by j , among whom unit j = 1 is the case
of interest and units j = 2 to j = J + 1 are potential
comparisons.3 Borrowing from the medical literature, we
will say that j = 1 is the “treated unit,” that is, the unit
exposed to the event or intervention of interest, and units
j = 2 to j = J + 1 constitute the “donor pool,” that is,
a reservoir of potential comparison units. Studies of this
type abound in political science (Gerring 2007; Tarrow
2010). Because comparison units are meant to approximate the counterfactual of the case of interest without
the intervention, it is important to restrict the donor pool
to units with outcomes that are thought to be driven by
the same structural process as for the unit representing
the case of interest and that were not subject to structural
shocks to the outcome variable during the sample period of the study. In the application explored later in this
article, we investigate the effects of the 1990, German reunification on the economic prosperity in West Germany.
In this example, the case of interest is West Germany in
1990 and the set of potential comparisons is a sample of
OECD countries.
We assume that the sample is a balanced panel, that is,
a longitudinal data set where all units are observed at the
same time periods, t = 1, . . . , T .4 We also assume that
3

For expositional simplicity, we focus on the case where only one
unit is exposed to the event or intervention of interest. This is
done without a loss of generality. In cases where multiple units are
affected by the event of interest, our method can be applied to each
affected unit separately or to an aggregate of all affected units.

4

This is typically the case in political science applications, where
sample units are large administrative entities like nation-states

the sample includes a positive number of preintervention
periods, T0 , as well as a positive number of postintervention periods, T1 , with T = T0 + T1 . Unit 1 is exposed to
the intervention of interest (the “treatment”) during periods T0 + 1, . . . , T , and the intervention has no effect
during the pretreatment period 1, . . . , T0 . The goal of
the study is to measure the effect of the intervention of
interest on some postintervention outcome.
As stated above, the preintervention characteristics
of the treated unit can often be much more accurately approximated by a combination of untreated units than by
any single untreated unit. We define a synthetic control as
a weighted average of the units in the donor pool. That is,
a synthetic control can be represented by a (J × 1) vector
of weights W = (w2 , . . . , w J +1 ) , with 0 ≤ w j ≤ 1 for
j = 2, . . . J and w2 + · · · + w J +1 = 1. Choosing a particular value for W is equivalent to choosing a synthetic
control. Following Mill’s Method of Difference, we propose selecting the value of W such that the characteristics
of the treated unit are best resembled by the characteristics
of the synthetic control. Let X 1 be a (k × 1) vector containing the values of the preintervention characteristics
of the treated unit that we aim to match as closely as possible, and let X 0 be the k × J matrix collecting the values
of the same variables for the units in the donor pool. The
preintervention characteristics in X 1 and X 0 may include
preintervention values of the outcome variable.
The difference between the preintervention characteristics of the treated unit and a synthetic control is
given by the vector X 1 − X 0 W. We select the synthetic
control, W ∗ , that minimizes the size of this difference.
This can be operationalized in the following manner. For
m = 1, . . . , k, let X 1m be the value of the m-th variable for
the treated unit and let X 0m be a 1 × J vector containing
the values of the m-th variable for the units in the donor
pool. Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) choose W ∗ as the value
of W that minimizes:
k


vm (X 1m − X 0m W)2 ,

(1)

m=1

where vm is a weight that reflects the relative importance
that we assign to the m-th variable when we measure
the discrepancy between X 1 and X 0 W.5 It is of crucial
or regions, for which data are periodically collected by statistical agencies. We do not require, however, that the sample periods
are equidistant in time.
5
More formally, let  ·  be a norm or seminorm√in Rk . One
example is the Euclidean norm, defined as u = u u for any
(k × 1) vector
√ u. For any positive semidefinite (k × k) matrix,
V , u = u V u defines a seminorm. The synthetic control

498

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

importance that synthetic controls closely reproduce the
values that variables with a large predictive power on the
outcome of interest take for the unit affected by the intervention. Accordingly, those variables should be assigned
large vm weights. In the empirical application below, we
apply a cross-validation method to choose vm .
Let Yjt be the outcome of unit j at time t. In addition, let Y1 be a (T1 × 1) vector collecting the postintervention values of the outcome for the treated unit.
That is, Y1 = (Y1 T0 +1 , . . . , Y1 T ) . Similarly, let Y0 be a
(T1 × J ) matrix, where column j contains the postintervention values of the outcome for unit j + 1. The
synthetic control estimator of the effect of the treatment
is given by the comparison of postintervention outcomes
between the treated unit, which is exposed to the intervention, and the synthetic control, which is not exposed to the
intervention, Y1 − Y0 W ∗ . That is, for a postintervention
period t (with t ≥ T0 ), the synthetic control estimator of
the effect of the treatment is given by the comparison between the outcome for the treated unit and the outcome
for the synthetic control at that period:
Y1 t −

J +1


w∗j Yjt .

j =2

The matching variables in X 0 and X 1 are meant to
be predictors of postintervention outcomes. These predictors are themselves not affected by the intervention.
Critics of Mill’s Method of Differences rightfully point
out that the applicability of the method may be limited
by the presence of unmeasured factors affecting the outcome variable as well as by heterogeneity in the effects of
observed and unobserved factors. However, using a linear
factor model, Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010)
argue that if the number of preintervention periods in the
data is large, matching on preintervention outcomes (i.e.,
on the preintervention counterparts of Y0 and Y1 ) helps
control for unobserved factors and for the heterogeneity of the effect of the observed and unobserved factors
on the outcome of interest. The intuition of this result is
straightforward: Only units that are alike in both observed
and unobserved determinants of the outcome variable as
well as in the effect of those determinants on the outcome
variable should produce similar trajectories of the outW ∗ = (w2∗ , . . . , w∗J +1 ) is selected to minimize X 1 − X 0 W, subject to 0 ≤ w j ≤ 1 for j = 2, . . . J and w2 + · · · + w J +1 = 1. Typically, V is selected to weight covariates in accordance to their predictive power on the outcome (see Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller 2010; Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003). If V is diagonal with
main diagonal equal to (v1 , . . . , vk ), then W ∗ is equal to the value
of W that minimizes Equation (1). Because W ∗ is invariant to scale
changes in (v1 , . . . , vk ), these weights can always be normalized to
sum to one.

come variable over extended periods of time. Once it has
been established that the unit representing the case of interest and the synthetic control unit have similar behavior
over extended periods of time prior to the intervention,
a discrepancy in the outcome variable following the intervention is interpreted as produced by the intervention
itself.6
Computation of synthetic controls can be done using
freely available software scripts that we have written for
R, MATLAB, and Stata.7

Comparison to Regression
Constructing a synthetic comparison as a linear combination of the untreated units with coefficients that sum
to one may appear unusual. However, here we show that
a regression-based approach also uses a linear combination of the untreated units with coefficients that sum to
one as a comparison, albeit implicitly. In contrast to the
synthetic control method, the regression approach does
not restrict the coefficients of the linear combination that
define the comparison unit to be between zero and one,
therefore allowing extrapolation outside the support of
the data.
The proof of this assertion is as follows. A regressionbased counterfactual of the outcome for the treated unit in
the absence of the treatment is given by the (T1 × 1) vector

B  X 1 , where 
B = (X 0 X 0 )−1 X 0 Y0 is the (k × T1 ) matrix
of regression coefficients of Y0 on X 0 .8 As a result, the
regression-based estimate of the counterfactual of interest
is equal to Y0 W reg , where W reg = X 0 (X 0 X 0 )−1 X 1 . Let ␫
be a (J × 1) vector of ones. The sum of the regression
weights is ␫ W reg . Assume that, as usual, the regression
includes an intercept, so the first row of X 0 is a vector of
ones.9 Then (X 0 X 0 )−1 X 0 ␫ is a (k × 1) vector with the first
element equal to one and all the rest equal to zero. The
6

In this respect, the synthetic control method combines the synchronic and diachronic approaches outlined in Lijphart (1971).
As pointed out by Gerring (2007), this approach is close in
spirit to comparative historical analysis methods (Mahoney and
Rueschemeyer 2003; Pierson and Skocpol 2002).
In Stata, the script can be installed by typing ssc install
synth, replace, which downloads the software from the Statistical Software Components (SSC) archive. In R, the software is available as the Synth package from the Comprehensive R Archive Network at http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=Synth. The R package is also described in detail in Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller
(2011). MATLAB code is available on the authors’ websites.

7

That is, each column r of the matrix 
B contains the regression
coefficients of the outcome variable at period t = T0 + r on X 0 .

8

9

It is easy to extend the proof to the more general case where the
unit vector, ␫, belongs to the subspace of R J +1 spanned by the rows
of [X 1 X 0 ].

499

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

reason is that (X 0 X 0 )−1 X 0 ␫ is the vector of coefficients
of the regression of ␫ on X 0 . Because ␫ is a vector of
ones and because the first row of X 0 is also a vector
of ones, the only nonzero coefficient of this regression
is the intercept, which takes a value equal to one. This
implies that ␫ W reg = ␫ X 0 (X 0 X 0 )−1 X 1 = 1 (because the
first element of X 1 is equal to one).
That is, the regression estimator is a weighting estimator with weights that sum to one. However, regression
weights are unrestricted and may take on negative values or values greater than one. As a result, estimates of
counterfactuals based on linear regression may extrapolate beyond the support of comparison units. Even if
the characteristics of the case of interest cannot be approximated using a weighted average of the characteristics of the potential controls, the regression weights
extrapolate to produce a perfect fit. In more technical
terms, even if X 1 is far from the convex hull of the
columns of X 0 , regression weights extrapolate to produce
X 0 W reg = X 0 X 0 (X 0 X 0 )−1 X 1 = X 1 .
Regression extrapolation can be detected if the
weights W reg are explicitly calculated, because it results
in weights outside the [0, 1] interval. We do not know,
however, of any previous article that explicitly computes
regression weights, and we are also unaware of previous
results interpreting regressions as weighting estimators
with weights that sum to one. Because regression weights
are not calculated in practice, the extent of extrapolation produced by regression techniques is typically hidden from the analyst. In the empirical section below, we
provide a comparison between the unit synthetic control
weights and the regression weights for the German reunification example. For that example, we show that the
regression-based counterfactual relies on extrapolation.
Extrapolation is, however, unnecessary in the context of
our German reunification example. We show that there
exists a synthetic control that closely fits the values of the
characteristics of the units and that does not extrapolate
outside of the support of the data.10

10

While using weights that sum to one and fall in the [0, 1] interval prevents extrapolation biases, interpolation biases may be
severe in some cases, especially if the donor pool contains units
with characteristics that are very different from those of the unit
representing the case of interest. To reduce interpolation biases,
we recommend restricting the donor pool to units that are similar to the one representing the case of interest. In addition, the
X 1 − X 0 W objective function for the weights could be complemented with penalty terms that incorporate the discrepancies in
characteristics between the unit representing the case of interest
and the units with positive weights in the synthetic control. Such
penalty terms can also be useful to select a synthetic control when
minimization of X 1 − X 0 W has multiple solutions, because X 1
falls in the convex hull of the columns of X 0 .

Inference with the Synthetic Control
Method
The use of statistical inference in comparative case studies is difficult because of the small-sample nature of the
data, the absence of randomization, and the fact that
probabilistic sampling is not employed to select sample
units. These limitations complicate the application of traditional approaches to statistical inference.11 However,
by systematizing the process of estimating the counterfactual of interest, the synthetic control method enables
researchers to conduct a wide array of falsification exercises, which we term “placebo studies,” that provide the
building blocks for an alternative mode of qualitative and
quantitative inference. This alternative model of inference is based on the premise that our confidence that a
particular synthetic control estimate reflects the impact
of the intervention under scrutiny would be severely undermined if we obtained estimated effects of similar or
even greater magnitudes in cases where the intervention
did not take place.
Suppose, for example, that the synthetic control
method estimates a sizable effect for a certain intervention of interest. Our confidence about the validity of this
result would dissipate if the synthetic control method also
estimated large effects when applied to dates when the intervention did not occur (Heckman and Hotz 1989). We
refer to these falsification exercises as “in-time placebos.”
These tests are feasible if there are available data for a sufficiently large number of time periods when no structural
shocks to the outcome variable occurred. In the example
of the next section, we consider the effect of the 1990 German reunification on per capita GDP in West Germany.
The German reunification occurred in 1990, but we have
data from 1960 and thus can test whether the method
produces large estimated effects when applied to dates
before the reunification. If we find estimated effects that
are of similar or larger magnitude than the one estimated
for the 1990 reunification, our confidence that the effect
estimated for the 1990 reunification is attributable to reunification itself would greatly diminish. In that case, the
placebo studies would suggest that synthetic controls do
not provide good predictions of the trajectory of the outcome in West Germany in periods when the reunification
did not occur. Conversely, in the empirical section below,
we find a very large effect for the 1990 German reunification, but no effect at all when we artificially reassign the
reunification period in our data to a date before 1990.

11
See Rubin (1990) for a description of the different modes of
statistical inference for causal effects.

500
Another way to conduct placebo studies is to reassign the intervention not in time, but to members of the
donor pool. We refer to these tests as “in-space placebos.”
Here the premise is that our confidence that a sizable
synthetic control estimate reflects the effect of the intervention would disappear if similar or larger estimates
arose when the intervention is artificially reassigned to
units not directly exposed to the intervention.
A particular implementation of this idea consists of
applying the synthetic control method to estimate placebo
effects for every potential control unit in the donor pool.
This creates a distribution of placebo effects against which
we can then evaluate the effect estimated for the unit that
represents the case of interest. Our confidence that a large
synthetic control estimate reflects the effect of the intervention would be undermined if the magnitude of the
estimated effect fell well inside the distribution of placebo
effects. As in traditional statistical inference, a quantitative
comparison between the distribution of placebo effects
and the synthetic control estimate can be operationalized
through the use of p-values. In this context, a p-value can
be constructed by estimating in-space placebo effects for
each unit in the sample and then calculating the fraction
of such effects greater than or equal to the effect estimated
for the treated unit. Notice that this inferential exercise
reduces to classical randomization inference when the
intervention is randomized (Rosenbaum 2005). In the
absence of randomization, the p-value still has an interpretation as the probability of obtaining an estimate at
least as large as the one obtained for the unit representing
the case of interest when the intervention is reassigned at
random in the data set. Notice that the inferential methods outlined in this section do not produce confidence
intervals or posterior distributions, and that the inferential exercises (and associated p-values) are restricted to
the question of whether or not the estimated effect of the
actual intervention is large relative to the distribution of
placebo effects. In the empirical section below, we show
that the synthetic control estimate for West Germany is
very large relative to the distribution of placebo estimates
for the countries in the donor pool.

Limitations of the Approach and Some
Recommendations for Empirical Practice
The synthetic control method facilitates comparative case
studies in instances when no single untreated unit provides a good comparison for the unit affected by the treatment or event of interest. This is often the case when the
treatment affects large aggregates like regions or countries, so a limited number of untreated units are available.

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

In this section, we discuss requirements and limitations of
the method and provide recommendations for empirical
practice.
Constructing a donor pool of comparison units requires some care. First, units affected by the event or
intervention of interest or by events of a similar nature
should be excluded from the donor pool. In addition,
units that may have suffered large idiosyncratic shocks to
the outcome of interest during the study period should
also be excluded if such shocks would have not affected
the treated unit in the absence of the treatment. Finally,
to avoid interpolation biases, it is important to restrict
the donor pool to units with characteristics similar to
the treated unit. Another reason to restrict the size of the
donor pool and consider only units similar to the treated
unit is to avoid overfitting. Overfitting arises when the
characteristics of the unit affected by the intervention or
event of interest are artificially matched by combining
idiosyncratic variations in a large sample of unaffected
units. The risk of overfitting motivates our adoption of
the cross-validation techniques applied in the empirical
section below.
The applicability of the method requires a sizable
number of preintervention periods. The reason is that
the credibility of a synthetic control depends upon how
well it tracks the treated unit’s characteristics and outcomes over an extended period of time prior to the treatment. We do not recommend using this method when the
pretreatment fit is poor or the number of pretreatment
periods is small.12 A sizable number of postintervention
periods may also be required in cases when the effect of
the intervention emerges gradually after the intervention
or changes over time.

The Economic Cost of the 1990
German Reunification
In this section, we apply the synthetic control method to
estimate the impact of the 1990 German reunification,
one of the most significant political events in postwar
Europe. After the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9,
1989, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal
Republic of Germany officially reunified on October 3,
1990. At that time, per capita GDP in West Germany was
about three times higher than in East Germany (Lipschitz
and McDonald 1990). Given the large income disparity, the integration of both countries after 45 years of
12
See Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) for a related discussion.

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

separation called for political and economic adjustments
of unprecedented complexity and scale. The 1990 German
reunification therefore provides an excellent case study to
examine the economic consequences of political integration. As Burda and Hunt (2001, 1) put it, “it is difficult
to find a more dramatic episode of economic dislocation in peacetime during the twentieth century than that
associated with the reunification of Germany.”
Many studies have examined the consequences of the
reunification (see Burda and Hunt 2001; Heilemann and
Rappen 2000; and Sinn 2002 for reviews), but most of
them focus on the consequences for (the former) East
Germany and the convergence between the East and West
German economy. The question of what the economic
costs are for West Germany has received less attention in
the literature. And while many argue that the economic
impact of reunification on the West German economy
has been negative, the magnitude of this effect remains
unknown (e.g., Canova and Ravn 2000; Heilemann and
Rappen 2000; Meinhardt et al. 1995). In particular, to our
knowledge no study has rigorously estimated the impact
of reunification on West German per capita GDP using
a comparative case study analysis. Here we fill this gap
and construct a synthetic West Germany as a weighted
average of other advanced industrialized countries chosen to resemble the values of economic growth predictors
for West Germany prior to the reunification. The synthetic West Germany is meant to replicate the (counterfactual) per capita GDP trend that West Germany would
have experienced in the absence of the 1990 reunification.
We then estimate the effect of the reunification by comparing the actual (with reunification) and counterfactual
(without reunification) per capita GDP series for West
Germany.13

501
tralia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Greece, Italy,
Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United
States.14
We provide a list of all variables used in the analysis in
the data appendix, along with data sources. The outcome
variable, Yjt , is the real per capita GDP in country j at
time t. GDP is Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)-adjusted
and measured in 2002 U.S. dollars (USD, hereafter). For
the pre-reunification characteristics in X 1 and X 0 , we
rely on a standard set of economic growth predictors:
per capita GDP, inflation rate, industry share of value
added, investment rate, schooling, and a measure of trade
openness (see the appendix for details). For each variable,
we checked that the German data refer exclusively to the
territory of the former West Germany.15 We experimented
with a wide set of additional growth predictors, but their
inclusion did not change our results substantively.

Constructing a Synthetic Version of West
Germany
Using the techniques described in the methodological
section above, we construct a synthetic West Germany
with weights chosen so that the resulting synthetic West
Germany best reproduces the values of the predictors
of per capita GDP in West Germany in the prereunification period. We use a cross-validation technique to
choose the weights vm in Equation (1). We first divide
the pretreatment years into a training period from 1971
to 1980 and a validation period from 1981 to 1990. Next,
using predictors measured in the training period, we select the weights vm such that the resulting synthetic control minimizes the root mean square prediction error

Data and Sample
We use annual country-level panel data for the period
1960–2003. The German reunification occurred in 1990,
giving a preintervention period of 30 years. Our sample
period ends in 2003 because a roughly decadelong period
after the reunification seems like a reasonable limit on the
span of plausible prediction. Recall that the synthetic West
Germany is constructed as a weighted average of potential control countries in the donor pool. Our donor pool
includes a sample of 16 OECD member countries: Aus13
Additionally, one could also try to estimate the effect of reunification on East Germany. However, concerns about the quality of
the official East German statistics before the German reunification
render this a questionable endeavor. See Lipschitz and McDonald
(1990).

14
To construct this sample, we started with the 23 OECD member
countries in 1990 (excluding West Germany). We first excluded
Luxembourg and Iceland because of their small size and because
of the peculiarities of their economies. We also excluded Turkey,
which had in 1990 a level of per capita GDP well below the other
countries in the sample. We finally excluded Canada, Finland, Sweden, and Ireland because these countries were affected by profound
structural shocks during the sample period. Ireland experienced a
rapid Celtic Tiger expansion period in the 1990s. Canada, Finland,
and Sweden experienced profound financial and fiscal crises at the
beginning of the 1990s. It is important to note, however, that when
included in the sample, these four countries obtain zero weights
in the synthetic control for West Germany. Therefore, our main
results are identical whether or not we exclude these countries.
15
For that purpose, when necessary, our data set was supplemented
with data from the German Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches
Bundesamt).

502

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

TABLE 1 Synthetic and Regression Weights for West Germany
Country

Synthetic
Control Weight

Regression
Weight

Country

Synthetic
Control Weight

Regression
Weight

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
France
Greece
Italy
Japan

0
0.42
0
0
0
0
0
0.16

0.12
0.26
0
0.08
0.04
−0.09
−0.05
0.19

Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

0.09
0
0
0
0
0.11
0
0.22

0.14
0.12
0.04
−0.08
−0.01
0.05
0.06
0.13

Notes: The synthetic weight is the country weight assigned by the synthetic control method. The regression weight is the weight assigned
by linear regression. See text for details.

(RMSPE) over the validation period.16 Intuitively, the
cross-validation technique selects the weights vm that
minimize out-of-sample prediction errors. Finally, we use
the set of vm weights selected in the previous step and predictor data measured in 1981–90 to estimate a synthetic
control for West Germany. The vm weights chosen by the
cross-validation indicate that the most important predictors (in order from highest to lowest weight) are GDP
per capita (0.442), investment rate (0.245), trade openness (0.134), schooling (0.107), inflation rate (0.072), and
industry share (0.001).17 We estimate the effect of the German reunification on per capita GDP in West Germany as
the difference in per capita GDP levels between West Germany and its synthetic counterpart in the years following
the reunification.
Table 1 shows the weights of each country in the synthetic version of West Germany. The synthetic West Germany is a weighted average of Austria, the United States,
Japan, Switzerland, and the Netherlands with weights decreasing in this order. All other countries in the donor
pool obtain zero weights. As a comparison, Table 1 also
16
The RMSPE measures lack of fit between the path of the outcome
variable for any particular country and its synthetic counterpart.
The pre-1990 RMSPE for West Germany is defined as

⎛
⎞2 ⎞1/2
T0
J +1


1
∗
⎝Y1t −
w j Yjt ⎠ ⎠ .
RMSPE = ⎝
T0 t=1
j =2
⎛

The RMSPE can be analogously defined for other countries or time
periods.
17
Our results are robust to alternative procedures to choose vm . In
particular, Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie, Diamond,
and Hainmueller (2010) chose vm so that the resulting synthetic
control best approximates the preintervention path of the outcome
variable. For the German reunification example, this way to choose
vm produces results that are almost identical to the results that we
obtain using the cross-validation technique used in this article.

TABLE 2 Economic Growth Predictor Means
before German Reunification

GDP per capita
Trade openness
Inflation rate
Industry share
Schooling
Investment rate

West
Germany

Synthetic
West Germany

OECD
Sample

15808.9
56.8
2.6
34.5
55.5
27.0

15802.2
56.9
3.5
34.4
55.2
27.0

8021.1
31.9
7.4
34.2
44.1
25.9

Notes: GDP per capita, inflation rate, trade openness, and industry
share are averaged for the 1981–90 period. Investment rate and
schooling are averaged for the 1980–85 period. The last column
reports a population-weighted average for the 16 OECD countries
in the donor pool.

reports the weights that regression analysis employs implicitly when applied to the same data (these weights are
backed out using the formulas presented in the methodological section above). By construction, both sets of
weights sum to one. The two sets of weights show some
similarities. For example, Austria receives the highest
weight in both approaches. Overall, however, the weights
are very different. For example, the regression weights for
Japan and Austria are much closer in values than their
synthetic control counterparts. Moreover, regression assigns negative weights to four of the 16 control units in
the donor pool: Greece (–0.09), Italy (–0.05), Portugal (–
0.08), and Spain (–0.01). As discussed previously, negative
weights indicate that regression relies on extrapolation.
Table 2 compares the prereunification characteristics
of West Germany to those of the synthetic West Germany,
and also to those of a population-weighted average of
the 16 OECD countries in the donor pool. Overall, the
results in Table 2 suggest that the synthetic West Germany

503

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

FIGURE 2 Trends in per Capita GDP: West
Germany versus Synthetic West
Germany

Reunification

5000

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
5000

Reunification

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany

0

West Germany
Rest of the OECD sample

0

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

FIGURE 1 Trends in per Capita GDP: West
Germany versus Rest of the OECD
Sample

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

provides a much better comparison for West Germany
than the average of our sample of other OECD countries.
The synthetic West Germany is very similar to the actual
West Germany in terms of pre-1990 per capita GDP, trade
openness, schooling, investment rate, and industry share.
Compared to the average of the OECD countries, the synthetic West Germany also matches West Germany much
closer on the inflation rate. Because West Germany had
the lowest inflation rate in the sample during the prereunification years, this variable cannot be perfectly fitted using a combination of the comparison countries. Figure 1
shows that before the German reunification, West Germany and the OECD average experienced different paths
in per capita GDP. However, in the next section, we will
show that a synthetic control can accurately reproduce
the pre-1990 per capita GDP path for West Germany.
One of the central points of this article is that the synthetic control method provides the qualitative researcher
with a quantitative tool to select or validate comparison
units. In our analysis, Austria, the United States, Japan,
Switzerland, and the Netherlands emerge, in this order,
as potential comparisons to West Germany. Regression
analysis fails to provide such a list. In a regression analysis, typically all units contribute to the regression fit, and
the contribution of units with large positive regression
weights may be counterbalanced by the contributions of
units with negative weights. In this example, the synthetic
control involves a combination of five countries. Below we
show how researchers can construct, if desired, synthetic
controls that use a smaller number of countries.

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

The Effect of the 1990 Reunification
Figure 2 displays the per capita GDP trajectory of West
Germany and its synthetic counterpart for the 1960–2003
period. The synthetic West Germany almost exactly reproduces the per capita GDP for West Germany during
the entire prereunification period. This close fit for the
prereunification per capita GDP and the close fit that we
obtain for the GDP predictors in Table 2 demonstrate
that there exists a combination of other industrialized
countries that reproduces the economic attributes of West
Germany before the reunification. That is, it is possible to
closely reproduce economic characteristics of West Germany before the 1990 reunification without extrapolating
outside of the support of the data for the donor pool.
Our estimate of the effect of the German reunification on per capita GDP in West Germany is given by the
difference between the actual West Germany and its synthetic version, visualized in Figure 3. We estimate that the
German reunification did not have much of an effect on
West German per capita GDP in the first two years immediately following reunification. In this initial period, per
capita GDP in the synthetic West Germany is even slightly
lower than in the actual West Germany, which is broadly
in line with arguments about an initial demand boom
(see, e.g., Meinbardt et al. 1995). From 1992 onward,
however, the two lines diverge substantially. While per
capita GDP growth decelerates in West Germany, for the
synthetic West Germany per capita GDP keeps ascending
at a pace similar to that of the prereunification period.

504

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

Placebo Reunification

5000

2000
0
−2000

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany

0

−4000

Gap in Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

Reunification

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

FIGURE 4 Placebo Reunification 1975–Trends
in per Capita GDP: West Germany
versus Synthetic West Germany

4000

FIGURE 3 Per Capita GDP Gap between West
Germany and Synthetic West
Germany

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

The difference between the two series continues to grow
towards the end of the sample period. Thus, our results
suggest a pronounced negative effect of the reunification
on West German income. We find that over the entire
1990–2003 period, per capita GDP was reduced by about
1,600 USD per year on average, which amounts to approximately 8% of the 1990 baseline level. In 2003, per
capita GDP in the synthetic West Germany is estimated
to be about 12% higher than in the actual West Germany.
One valid concern in the context of this study is the
potential existence of spillover effects. In particular, it
is possible that the German reunification had effects on
per capita GDP in countries other than Germany. Notice,
however, that the limited number of units in the synthetic
control allows the evaluation of the existence and direction of potential biases created by spillover effects. For example, if the German reunification had negative spillover
effects on the per capita GDP of the countries included
in the synthetic control, then the synthetic control would
provide an underestimate of the counterfactual per capita
GDP trajectory for West Germany in the absence of the
reunification and, therefore, an underestimate of the negative effect of the reunification on per capita GDP in West
Germany. On the other hand, if the German reunification
had positive effects in the economies included in the synthetic control, this would exacerbate the negative effect of
the synthetic control estimates. Notice also that spillover
effects on countries not included in the synthetic control
do not affect the synthetic control estimates.

1960

1965

1970

1975
Year

1980

1985

1990

Placebo Studies
To evaluate the credibility of our results, we conduct
placebo studies where the treatment of interest is reassigned in the data to a year other than 1990 or to countries different from West Germany. We first compare the
reunification effect estimated above for West Germany to
a placebo effect obtained after reassigning the German
reunification in our data to a period before the reunification actually took place. A large placebo estimate would
undermine our confidence that the results in Figure 2 are
indeed indicative of the economic cost of reunification
and not merely driven by lack of predictive power.
To conduct this placebo study, we rerun the model
for the case when reunification is reassigned to the middle of the pretreatment period in the year 1975, about
15 years earlier than reunification actually occurred. We
use the same out-of-sample validation technique to compute the synthetic control, and we lag the predictors variables accordingly for the training and validation period.
Figure 4 displays the results of this “in-time placebo”
study. The synthetic West Germany almost exactly reproduces the evolution of per capita GDP in the actual West
Germany for the 1960–1975 period. Most importantly,
the per capita GDP trajectories of West Germany and its
synthetic counterpart do not diverge considerably during
the 1975–1990 period. That is, in contrast to the actual
1990 German reunification, our 1975 placebo reunification has no perceivable effect. This suggests that the gap
estimated in Figure 2 reflects the impact of the German

505

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

FIGURE 5 Ratio of Postreunification RMSPE to Prereunification
RMSPE: West Germany and Control Countries
West Germany
Norway
Greece
Italy
New Zealand
United States
Spain
Australia
Belgium
Switzerland
Austria
United Kingdom
Japan
Netherlands
France
Denmark
Portugal

5

10

15

Postperiod RMSPE / Preperiod RMSPE

reunification and not a potential lack of predictive power
of the synthetic control.18
An alternative way to conduct placebo studies is to
reassign the treatment in the data to a comparison unit.
In this way, we can obtain synthetic control estimates for
countries that did not experience the event of interest.
Applying this idea to each country in the donor pool
allows us to compare the estimated effect of the German reunification on West Germany to the distribution
of placebo effects obtained for other countries. We will
deem the effect of the German reunification on West Germany significant if the estimated effect for West Germany
is unusually large relative to the distribution of placebo
effects.
Figure 5 reports the ratios between the post-1990
RMSPE and the pre-1990 RMSPE for West Germany and
for all the countries in the donor pool. Recall that RM-

SPE measures the magnitude of the gap in the outcome
variable of interest between each country and its synthetic
counterpart. A large postintervention RMSPE is not indicative of a large effect of the intervention if the synthetic
control does not closely reproduce the outcome of interest
prior to the intervention. That is, a large postintervention
RMSPE is not indicative of a large effect of the intervention if the preintervention RMSPE is also large. For each
country, we divide the postreunification RMSPE by its
pre-reunification RMSPE.19 In Figure 5, West Germany
clearly stands out as the country with the highest RMSPE ratio. For West Germany, the postreunification gap
is about 16 times larger than the prereunification gap. If
one were to pick a country at random from the sample,
the chances of obtaining a ratio as high as this one would
be 1/17 0.059.

18
We have computed similar in-time placebo studies where we
reassign in our data the German reunification to the years 1970
and 1980, respectively, and the results are similar to the results for
1975 shown here.

19
By taking the ratio between the post-1990 RMSPE, and the pre1990 RMSPE, we avoid having to discard countries with pre-1990
per capita GDP values that cannot be approximated with a synthetic
control. See Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010).

506

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

larger effect compared to the results of the previous
analysis.

Reducing the Number of Units in a
Synthetic Control

5000

Reunification

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany
Synthetic West Germany (leave-one-out)

0

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

FIGURE 6 Leave-One-Out Distribution of the
Synthetic Control for West Germany

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

Robustness Test
In this section, we run a robustness check to test the
sensitivity of our main results to changes in the country
weights, W ∗ . Recall from Table 1 that the synthetic West
Germany is estimated as a weighted average of Austria,
the United States, Japan, Switzerland, and the Netherlands, with weights decreasing in this order. Here we
iteratively reestimate the baseline model to construct a
synthetic West Germany omitting in each iteration one
of the countries that received a positive weight in Table 1.
By excluding countries that received a positive weight we
sacrifice some goodness of fit, but this sensitivity check
allows us to evaluate to what extent our results are driven
by any particular control country.
Figure 6 displays the results and reproduces Figure
2 (solid and dashed black lines) while also incorporating the leave-one-out estimates (gray lines). This figure
shows that the results of the previous analysis are fairly
robust to the exclusion of any particular country from
our sample of comparison countries. The leave-one-out
synthetic control that shows the smallest effect of the reunification is the one that excludes the United States. Even
this estimate is fairly large in substantive terms: Per capita
GDP over the 1990–2003 period is reduced by about 630
USD per year on average, approximately 3% of the 1990
baseline level. In 2003, per capita GDP in this synthetic
West Germany is estimated to be about 7% higher than
in the actual West Germany. The other leave-one-out
synthetic controls show either a very similar or slightly

Recall again that the synthetic West Germany in Figure 2
is a weighted average of five control countries: Austria, the
United States, Japan, Switzerland, and the Netherlands.
Comparative researchers, however, typically choose a very
small number of cases, with the aim of meticulously describing and analyzing the characteristics and outcomes
of each of those cases. As a result, in many instances, comparative researchers may favor sparse synthetic controls,
that is, synthetic controls that involve a small number of
comparison countries. Reducing the number of units in
the synthetic control may, nonetheless, impact the extent
to which the synthetic control is able to fit the characteristics of the unit of interest. In this section, we examine
the trade-off between sparsity and goodness of fit in the
choice of the number of units that contribute to the synthetic control for West Germany.
In order to investigate this trade-off, we construct
synthetic controls for West Germany, allowing only combinations of four, three, two, and a single control country,
respectively.20 Table 3 shows the countries and weights
for the sparse synthetic controls. For this example, the
countries contributing to the sparse versions of the synthetic control for West Germany are subsets of the set
of five countries contributing to the synthetic control
in the baseline specification.21 Austria retains the largest
weight in all instances, whereas the United States, Japan,
and Switzerland are second, third, and fourth in terms of
their synthetic control weights.
Table 4 compares economic growth predictors of
West Germany, synthetic West Germany, the sparse versions of synthetic West Germany, and the OECD sample.
This table documents the sacrifice in terms of goodness
of fit resulting from a reduction in the number of countries, l , allowed to contribute to the synthetic control.
More precisely, for l = 4, 3, 2, 1, and for all possible combinations of l control countries, we choose the one that produces the
synthetic control unit that minimizes the loss defined in Equation
(1). To reduce computational complexity, we used the weights vm
obtained for the baseline model instead of attempting to recalculate
these weights for the many different combinations of l countries.
20

21
Also, each subset of countries in Table 3 is nested by any other
subset containing a larger number of countries. This is not imposed in our analysis, as we consider all possible combinations of
countries among the 16 countries in the donor pool, and it may
not necessarily be the case for other applications.

507

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

TABLE 3 Synthetic Weights from Combinations of Control Countries
Synthetic Combination

Countries and W-Weights

Five control countries

Austria
0.42
Austria
0.56
Austria
0.59
Austria
0.76
Austria
1

Four control countries
Three control countries
Two control countries
One control country

USA
0.22
USA
0.22
USA
0.26
USA
0.24

Japan
0.16
Japan
0.12
Japan
0.15

Switzerland
0.11
Switzerland
0.10

Netherlands
0.09

Notes: Countries and W-weights for synthetic control are constructed from the best-fitting combination of five, four, three, and two
countries, as well as one country. See text for details.

TABLE 4 Economic Growth Predictor Means before the German Reunification for Combinations of
Control Countries
Synthetic West Germany
Number of countries in synthetic control

West

GDP per capita
Trade openness
Inflation rate
Industry share
Schooling
Investment rate

OECD

Germany

5

4

3

2

1

Sample

15808.9
56.8
2.6
34.5
55.5
27.0

15802.2
56.9
3.5
34.4
55.2
27.0

15800.9
55.9
3.6
34.6
57.6
27.2

15492.9
52.5
3.6
34.8
57.7
26.8

15580.9
61.5
3.8
34.3
60.7
25.6

14817.0
74.6
3.5
35.5
60.9
26.6

8021.1
31.9
7.4
34.2
44.1
25.9

Notes: GDP per capita, inflation rate, and trade openness are averaged for the 1981–1990 period. Industry share is averaged for the
1981–1990 period. Investment rate and schooling are averaged for the 1980–1985 period.

Overall, relative to the baseline synthetic control with five
countries, the decline in goodness of fit is moderate for
l = 4, 3, 2. The “matching”case of l = 1, where the synthetic West Germany is Austria, produces a much worse
goodness of fit relative to l > 1, with substantial discrepancies in the per capita GDP and trade openness variables.
However, even the matching case, with l = 1, represents
a large improvement in terms of goodness of fit relative to the comparison unit consisting of the populationweighted average of the OECD sample.
Figure 7 shows the per capita GDP path for West Germany and the sparse synthetic controls with l = 4, 3, 2, 1.
With the exception of the matching case (l = 1), the
sparse synthetic controls in Figure 7 produce results that
are very similar to the baseline result in Figure 2. However,
using a single country, Austria, as a comparison provides
a much poorer fit to the pre-1990 per capita GDP path

for West Germany.22 This analysis illustrates the potential gains from using combinations of countries rather
than single countries as comparison cases in comparative
research.23
22

For example, at the time of the German reunification, the per
capita GDP in Austria was about 7% lower than that of West Germany.
23

The comparison between Austria and West Germany in the lower
right panel of Figure 7 comes close to a difference-in-differences
design, with Austria having a lower per capita GDP than West
Germany during the pre-1990 period, but a fairly similar trend in
this variable. In this comparison, we see that the Austrian per capita
GDP surpassed the West German per capita GDP a few years after
the reunification, even when it had been consistently lower for at
least 30 years prior to the reunification. Therefore, this comparison
also suggests a negative effect of the German reunification in West
Germany. See Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) for a
discussion of the relationship between the synthetic control and
the difference-in-differences estimator.

508

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

FIGURE 7 Per Capita GDP Gaps between West Germany and Sparse Synthetic Controls
Number of Control Countries: 3
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany

0

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany

Reunification

5000

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
5000

Reunification

0

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

Number of Control Countries: 4

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

1960

2000

1990

2000

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany

0

West Germany
Synthetic West Germany

Reunification

5000

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

Reunification

5000

1980
Year

Number of Control Countries: 1

0

Per Capita GDP (PPP, 2002 USD)

Number of Control Countries: 2

1970

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

Conclusion
There is a widespread consensus among political methodologists about the necessity to integrate and exploit complementarities between qualitative and quantitative tools
for empirical research in political science. However, some
of the efforts in this direction have been denounced by
qualitative methodologists as attempts to impose quantitative templates on qualitative research that disregard
or do not make use of the many genuine advantages of
qualitative research (Brady and Collier 2004; George and
Bennett 2005). The synthetic control method discussed
in this article falls in between the qualitative and quan-

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

titative methodologies and provides a potentially useful
tool for researchers of both traditions. On the one hand,
the synthetic control method provides a systematic way to
select comparison units in quantitative comparative case
studies. In this way, as in Card and Krueger (1994) and
Rosenbaum (2005), the synthetic control method brings
to quantitative studies the careful selection of cases that is
done in qualitative analysis. In addition, by explicitly specifying the set of units that are used for comparison, the
method does not preclude but facilitates detailed qualitative analysis and comparison between the case of interest
and the set of comparison units selected by the method.
That is, the synthetic control method can be used to guide

COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND THE SYNTHETIC CONTROL METHOD

the selection of comparison units in qualitative studies,
allowing what Tarrow (1995) calls “qualitative inference
with quantitative bones.”

Appendix
The data sources employed for the application are as follows:

r GDP per Capita (PPP, 2002 USD). Source: OECD

r

r

r
r

r

National Accounts (retrieved via the OECD
Health Database). Data for West Germany was
obtained from Statistisches Bundesamt 2005
(Arbeitskreis “Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnungen der Länder”) and converted using PPP
monetary conversion factors (retrieved from the
OECD Health Database).
Investment Rate: Ratio of real domestic investment (private plus public) to real GDP. The data
are reported in five-year averages. Source: Barro,
Robert Joseph, and Jong-wha Lee. 1994. “Data
Set for a Panel of 138 Countries.” Available at
http://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/.
Schooling: Percentage of secondary school attained in the total population aged 25 and older.
The data are reported in five-year increments.
Source: Barro, Robert Joseph, and Jong-wha Lee.
2000. “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications.” CID Working
Paper No. 42, April 2000 – Human Capital Updated Files.
Industry: industry share of value added. Source:
World Bank WDI Database 2005 and Statistisches Bundesamt 2005.
Inflation: annual percentage change in consumer
prices (base year 1995). Source: World Development Indicators Database 2005 and Statistisches
Bundesamt 2005.
Trade Openness: Export plus imports as percentage of GDP. Source: World Bank: World Development Indicators CD-ROM 2000.

References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010.
“Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
105(490): 493–505.
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2011.
“Synth: An R Package for Synthetic Control Methods in

509
Comparative Case.” Journal of Statistical Software 42(13):
1–17.
Abadie, Alberto, and Javier Gardeazabal. 2003. “The Economic
Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the Basque Country.”
American Economic Review 93(1): 112–32.
Beck, Nathaniel. 2010. “Causal Process ‘Observation’: Oxymoron or (Fine) Old Wine.” Political Analysis 18(4): 499–
505.
Brady, Henry E., and David Collier, eds. 2004. Rethinking Social Inquiry: Diverse Tools, Shared Standards. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Burda, Michael C., and Jennifer Hunt. 2001. “From Reunification to Economic Integration: Productivity and the Labor
Market in Eastern Germany.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2: 1–92.
Canova, Fabio, and Morten O. Ravn. 2000. “The Macroeconomic Effects of German Unification: Real Adjustments and
the Welfare State.” Review of Economic Dynamics 3: 423–460.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and
Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry in
New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic Review
84(4): 772–93.
Collier, David. 1993. “The Comparative Method.” In Political
Science: The State of the Discipline II, ed. Ada W. Finifter.
Washington, DC: American Political Science Association,
105–19.
Collier, David and James Mahoney. 1996. “Insights and pitfalls:
selection bias in qualitative research.” World Politics. 49(1):
56–91.
Collier, David, James Mahoney, and Jason Seawright. 2004.”
Claiming Too Much: Warnings about Selection Bias.” In
Rethinking Social Inquiry: Diverse Tools, Shared Standards,
Eds, ed. Henry E. Brady and David Collier. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield, 85–102.
Fearon, James D. 1991. “Counterfactuals and Hypothesis Testing in Political Science.” World Politics 43(2): 169–195.
Geddes, Barbara. 2003. Paradigms and Sand Castles: Theory
Building and Research Design in Comparative Politics. Ann
Arbor:University of Michigan Press.
George, Alexander L., and Andrew Bennett. 2005. Case Studies
and Theory Development in the Social Sciences. Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.
Gerring, John. 2004. “What Is a Case Study and What Is It Good
For?” American Political Science Review 98(2): 341–54.
Gerring, John. 2007. Case Study Research: Principles and Practices. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Peter. 2003. “Aligning Ontology and Methodology in
Comparative Politics.” In Comparative Historical Analysis
in the Social Sciences, ed. James Mahoney and Dietrich
Rueschemeyer. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
373-429.
Heckman, James, and V. Joseph Hotz. 1989.“Choosing among
Alternative Nonexperimental Methods for Estimating the
Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 84(408):
862–74.
Heilemann, Ullrich, and Hermann Rappen. 2000. “Zehn Jahre
Deutsche Einheit: Bestandsaufnahme und Perspektiven.”
RWI-Papiere Essen 67.

510
King, Gary, Robert O. Keohane, and Sidney Verba. 1994. Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
King, Gary, and Langche Zeng. 2006. “The Dangers of Extreme
Counterfactuals.” Political Analysis 14(2): 131–59.
Lieberman, Evan. 2005. “Nested Analysis as a Mixed-Method
Strategy for Comparative Research.” American Political Science Review 99(3): 435–52.
Lijphart, Arend. 1971. “Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method.” American Political Science Review 65(3):
682–93.
Lipschitz, Leslie, and Donogh McDonald. 1990. “German Unification: Economic Issues.” International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper No 75.
Mahoney, James, and Dietrich Rueschemeyer. 2003. Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Meinhardt, Volker, Bernhard Seidel, Frank Stile, and Dieter Teichmann. 1995. “Transferleistungen in die neuen
Bundesländer und deren wirtschaftliche Konsequenzen.”
Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung, Sonderheft 154.
Pierson, Paul, and Theda Skocpol. 2002. “Historical Institutionalism in Contemporary Political Science.” In Political

ALBERTO ABADIE, ALEXIS DIAMOND, AND JENS HAINMUELLER

Science: The State of the Discipline, ed. Ira Katznelson and
Helen Millner. New York: W. W. Norton: 693–721.
Ragin, Charles C. 1987. The Comparative Method: Moving Beyond Qualitative and Quantitative Strategies. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 2005. “Heterogeneity and Causality: Unit
Heterogeneity and Design Sensitivity in Observational Studies.” The American Statistician 59(2): 147-52.
Rubin, Donald B. 1990. “Formal Modes of Statistical Inference
for Causal Effects.” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference 25: 279–92.
Sinn, Hans-Werner. 2002. “Germany’s Economic Unification:
An Assessment after Ten Years.” Review of International Economics 10(1): 113–28.
Sekhon, Jasjeet S. 2004. “Quality Meets Quantity: Case Studies,
Conditional Probability, and Counterfactuals.” Perspectives
on Politics 2(2): 281–93.
Tarrow, Sidney. 1995. “Bridging the Quantitative-Qualitative
Divide in Political Science.” American Political Science Review 89(2): 471–74.
Tarrow, Sidney. 2010. “The Strategy of Paired Comparison:
Toward a Theory of Practice.” Comparative Political Studies
43(2): 230–59.

