ANNUAL
REVIEWS

Further

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Click here for quick links to
Annual Reviews content online,
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search

Identification of Dynamic
Discrete Choice Models
Jaap H. Abbring
CentER, Department of Econometrics and OR, Tilburg University, 5000 LE Tilburg,
The Netherlands; email: J.H.Abbring@uvt.nl

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010. 2:367–94

Key Words

First published online as a Review in Advance on
March 8, 2010

discrete decision process, optimal stopping, hazard, hitting time,
heterogeneity

The Annual Review of Economics is online at
econ.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev.economics.102308.124349
Copyright © 2010 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
1941-1383/10/0904-0367$20.00

Abstract
Econometric models of dynamic discrete choice processes are applied
to a wide variety of economic problems. Recent research on their
empirical content has brought important new insights. It has clarified
the conditions for their identification from choice and covariate
panel data in the absence of dynamic selection on unobservables.
It has provided important new identification results for discretetime models with unobserved heterogeneity and unobserved states.
Finally, it has enhanced the attractiveness of continuous-time models,
by developing new insights on the identification of continuous-time
optimal stopping models. Current developments in the literature
promise to shed further light on the specification and identification
of models with unobserved state variables, theory-based nonproportional hazard models, continuous-time optimal stopping
models with time-varying covariates, and dynamic games in discrete
and continuous time.

367

1. INTRODUCTION

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Empirical economists now commonly use econometric models that explicitly specify
agents’ dynamic discrete choices as the solution to dynamic programming problems.
Broadly, three classes of models can be distinguished: (a) discrete-time models, (b) continuous-time models in which agents take discrete decisions at random and discrete (Poisson)
times, and (c) continuous-time models driven by Brownian motion or more general persistent processes.
Discrete-time dynamic programming models have been applied to a wide range of
economic problems. Keane & Wolpin (2009) review examples of recent empirical studies
of schooling, employment, fertility, and health insurance choices. Advances in the econometric analysis of dynamic discrete games, such as firm entry and exit games in industrial
organization, have further amplified their relevance because, in these games’ Markov
perfect equilibria, each agent solves a dynamic program given the other players’ strategies
(see Ackerberg et al. 2007 for a review).
Heckman & Singer (1985, 1986) present examples of continuous-time models based on
Poisson processes. Among these, sequential job search models are now a key tool in the
empirical analysis of labor market dynamics (Eckstein & Van den Berg 2007). In them, job
offers arrive at Poisson times, and agents decide whether to accept job offers when they
have arrived. Typically, they use threshold rules: Agents accept jobs that offer a wage above
a certain reservation wage. Similar models have appeared in insurance economics in which
agents decide on claiming losses that are incurred at Poisson times (Abbring et al. 2008).
The key distinguishing feature of this class of models is that transitions only take place at
the Poisson times of the shocks. This naturally leads to a hazard specification in terms of
the intensity of those shocks (job-offer arrival rate) and the conditional probabilities that
these trigger transitions (job acceptance probabilities). Consequently, these models can be
analyzed with standard hazard methods.
Continuous-time models driven by Brownian motion, and more general persistent processes, are central to the options literature in finance, and its applications to real options
problems (Dixit & Pindyck 1994, Stokey 2009). In these models, agents typically make
optimal transitions when the latent process first hits a threshold. Shimer’s (2008) analysis
of unemployment durations is one recent example. They share this feature with many of
the models discussed in this review. The models that we classify as hitting-time models
stand out because their latent processes creep across (attain), not jump across, the threshold at the first hitting time. This ensures that standard methods for the analysis of hitting
times of Brownian motion can be applied or extended to analyze these models. Hazard
specifications only follow indirectly.
All three classes of models are applied with the ultimate ambition to learn about the
primitives of dynamic decision processes. If these primitives can be measured from data,
the effects of counterfactual policy experiments can be computed, state dependence and
dynamic selection can be separated, and risk and heterogeneity can be disentangled. This
review addresses the fundamental question of to what extent it is possible to determine
model primitives from choice, outcome, and covariate panel data.
The discrete- and continuous-time literatures have much in common. Both usually
employ Markov decision processes. Some of the early applications of discrete-time models,
such as Pakes’s (1986) study of patent renewal and values and Rust’s (1987) analysis
of bus-engine renewal, involved optimal stopping problems similar to those in the
368

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

continuous-time real options literature. Empirical job search models have been
implemented in both discrete and continuous time, and Flinn & Heckman (1982) explicitly
note that their identification results for continuous-time search models can be applied
in discrete time. However, many fields of economics have settled on either discrete- or
continuous-time models, and many of the techniques for their analysis differ substantially.
Consequently, both literatures have mostly developed separately. In this review, we bring
them together, in the hope that this inspires progress both ways.
This review updates and complements earlier reviews. Rust’s (1994) key review of
discrete-time Markov discrete choice models contains his well-known nonidentification
result but necessarily misses more recent developments. Aguirregabiria & Mira’s (2010)
extensive update focuses on specification and estimation of discrete-time models and
ignores identification. Van den Berg (2001) discusses the specification and identification
of continuous-time mixed proportional hazards (MPH) models, and Eckstein & Van den
Berg (2007) review empirical search models. We complement these papers with a brief,
unifying update of the literature on the MPH model and a review of recent progress in
applying this literature to hitting-time models. Finally, Abbring & Heckman (2007, 2008)
review the literature on dynamic treatment effects and dynamic policy evaluation. We
focus more narrowly on dynamic discrete choice models and discuss some of the most
recent developments.
The article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews identification results for discretetime models. Sections 3 and 4 discuss continuous-time hazard and hitting-time models.
Section 5 concludes with some reflections on the state of the literature.

2. DISCRETE-TIME MODELS
This section reviews the identifiability of discrete decision processes in discrete time from
panel data on choices, state variables, outcomes, and auxiliary measurements. In Section
2.1, we first present a basic dynamic discrete decision model with properties shared by
much, but not all, of the analysis reviewed in this section: Markov state dynamics, rational
beliefs, and time-separable preferences.
Section 2.2 reviews identification of the simplest econometric implementation of this
framework, based on Rust’s (1987) conditional independence assumption. This assumption, with the assumption that utility is additively separable in observables and unobservables, facilitates a discussion of the identification of primitives, without needing to worry
about dynamic selection on unobservables. Much of the recent research on dynamic discrete choice analysis and dynamic discrete games is firmly rooted in Rust’s framework:
Either it relies directly on his conditional independence assumption or it uses results for his
framework in a second stage, after dealing with selection on observables in a first stage.
Section 2.3 reviews an example of the latter approach, by discussing the first-stage
identification of models with discrete unobserved heterogeneity. Such models have been
popularized by the work of Eckstein & Wolpin (1990, 1999), Keane & Wolpin (1997), and
others and are arguably the most common extension of Rust’s framework with nontrivial
dynamic selection.
Sections 2.4 and 2.5 discuss recent developments in the identification of models with
more general serially correlated unobservables. In both sections, identification relies crucially on observations of both choices and choice-specific outcomes, and on cross-equation
restrictions dictated by economic theory.
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

369

2.1. Markov Discrete Decision Processes
We first introduce the basic Markov dynamic discrete decision problem that is central to
the econometric dynamic discrete choice literature reviewed in this section.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

2.1.1. Setup. Consider an agent living in discrete time, indexed by t 2 T  . The agent’s
  g for finite T
  . It may also be infinite;
horizon may be finite, in which case T   f1; . . . ; T
then, T   {1, 2, . . .}.
At each time t, a state vector St, with support S, is revealed to the agent. Subsequently,
the agent chooses an action from a set At (St)  A ¼ {1, 2, . . . , J}, with 1  J 5 1. The
agent’s choice of action affects both current payoffs directly, and future payoffs indirectly,
through its controlling effect on future states. Specifically, if the agent selects action a 2
  , moves to period tþ1 with a new state
At (St), he collects utility ut (a, St) and, if t 5 T
vector Stþ1 drawn, independently from states and actions before period t, from the
(controlled) transition distribution Qptþ1(|a, St).
The agent chooses actions that maximize his expected utility, discounted with a factor
0  r 5 1. He has rational beliefs and uses the objective Markov transition distributions
Qptþ1 to form his expectations over future states and decisions.
2.1.2. Solution. The solution to this agent’s Markov discrete decision process can be analyzed recursively. Denote the agent’s optimal action at time t with At. Under standard
regularity conditions, At satisfies
Ut ða; St Þ;
At ¼ arg max

a2At ðSt Þ

where Ut , t 2 T p, solves the Bellman equation
Z

 :
max
Utþ1
ða0 ; s0 ÞdQtþ1 ðs0 j a; St Þ; t 5 T
Ut ða; St Þ ¼ ut ða; St Þ þ r
0

a0 2Atþ1 ðs Þ

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

If the horizon is finite, under regularity conditions, Equation 2 can be solved backward,
from a terminal condition UT  ¼ uT  . Then, there exists a Markov decision rule at : S ! A
such that At ¼ at(St) satisfies Equation 1, t 2 T p.
With an infinite horizon, the agent’s problem is particularly easy to solve if it is stationary, that is, if none of its primitives depends on time. Then, under standard regularity
conditions, contraction arguments imply that the Bellman operator implicitly defined by
the right-hand side of Equation 2 has a unique fixed point Up, so that Equation 1 defines a
stationary Markov decision rule a.

2.2. Conditional Independence
Rust (1987, 1994) empirically implements the previous section’s Markov decision framework by distinguishing between state variables Xt that are observed by the econometrician
and state variables Wt that are not and by limiting the role of the unobserved state variables, so that they do not help the agent in predicting future payoffs and do not lead to
dynamic econometric selection problems.
2.2.1. Setup. Let St ¼ (Xt,Wt), where Xt takes values in X , and Wt  [Wt(1), . . . ,Wt(J)] is
continuously distributed on RJ. Rust differentiates their roles in the Markov discrete
370

Abbring

decision model in three ways. (a) Choice sets only depend on the observed state variables,
so that Apt (Xt,Wt) ¼ At(Xt). (b) Utility is additively separable in a general component
depending on observed state variables and actions and a choice-specific unobserved state
shock: ut (a, Xt, Wt) ¼ ut(a, Xt) þWt(a). (c) The controlled Markov transition distribution
Qptþ1 satisfies a conditional independence condition: Its density (relative to an appropriate
dominating measure) qptþ1 can be decomposed as

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

qtþ1 ðXtþ1 ;Wtþ1 j at ; Xt ;Wt Þ ¼ qtþ1 ðXtþ1 j at ; Xt Þgtþ1 ðWtþ1 j Xtþ1 Þ;

ð3Þ

for some density qtþ1 and a Lebesgue density gtþ1.
The conditional independence assumption in Equation 3 embodies two restrictions:
(a) The observed state variables evolve, independently from the unobserved state variables,
as a controlled first-order Markov process, and (b) the unobserved state variables evolve
independently from the agent’s actions and only depend on the state’s history through the
concurrent observed state variable. This excludes both permanent unobserved heterogeneity and autocorrelated unobserved state variables. Restriction (a) implies that the evolution
of the observed state variables is not informative on the unobservables; this distinguishes
these state variables from the choice-specific outcomes considered in Sections 2.4 and 2.5.
For completeness, we also decompose the density q1 of the initial state as q1 (X1, W1) ¼
q1 (X1)g1 (W1 |X1), for some density q1 and Lebesgue density g1. We furthermore set


R
E½Wt j Xt  ¼ wgt ðw j Xt Þdw ¼ 0, so that E ut ða; Xt ;Wt Þ j Xt ¼ ut ða; Xt Þ. In fact, in
applied work, it is often assumed that the unobserved state variables Wt are simply independent shocks.
These separability and conditional independence assumptions facilitate the analysis of
Equations 1 and 2 on a smaller state space. In particular, they imply that
At ¼ at ðXt ;Wt Þ ¼ arg max fUt ða; Xt Þ þ Wt ðaÞg;
a2At ðXt Þ

ð4Þ

where the choice-specific (expected) value function Ut(a, Xt)Utp (a, Xt, Wt) Wt(a) solves
the Bellman equation
Z
Ut ða; Xt Þ ¼ ut ða; Xt Þ þ r Rtþ1 ðx0 ÞdQtþ1 ðx0 j a; Xt Þ:
ð5Þ
Here,
Rtþ1 ðx0 Þ 

Z
max

a0 2Atþ1 ðx0 Þ



Utþ1 ða0 ; x0 Þ þ w0 ða0 Þ gtþ1 ðw0 j x0 Þdw0

is McFadden’s (1981) social surplus function.
2.2.2. Identification. Now consider identification. Suppose that we observe the discrete


 , with 2  T
 T
  finite. We
choices At and state variables Xt for t 2 T  1; . . . ; T
abstract from sampling error and assume that the data provide us with the joint distribution
of ½ðA1 ; X1 Þ; . . . ; ðAT ; XT Þ. Note that this distribution is fully determined by the terminal
choice-specific values UT and the following primitives: (a) the initial distribution Q1 of X1;
 1g; (c) the distributions Gt of
(b) the Markov transition distributions Qtþ1, t 2 f1; . . . ; T
 1g; and (e) the
the choice-specific shocks, t 2 T ; (d) the utility functions ut, t 2 f1; . . . ; T
discount factor r. Consequently, at best we can hope to identify this subset of primitives, and
 ¼T
  , we observe the full choice history, and this
UT , from the data. In the special case that T
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

371

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

includes all primitives, in particular, uT ¼ UT . In the stationary infinite-horizon case, the
subset of primitives itself includes all primitives and uniquely determines UT . In general, we
need to treat UT as a primitive to be identified (Magnac & Thesmar 2002).
The initial state distribution Q1 is formally a primitive of the decision problem because
we have implicitly assumed that the data are collected from this problem’s initial period
onward. If we relax this assumption, Q1 will be the distribution of the observed state some
time after its initialization. In the stationary case, we could take this to the limit and
interpret Q1 in terms of the other primitives, as the long-run (ergodic) distribution of Xt.
We would like to know whether the data on ½ðA1 ; X1 Þ; . . . ; ðAT ; XT Þ uniquely determine the relevant primitives and UT . Throughout, it should be understood that identification can only be obtained on the relevant supports. Moreover, for expositional convenience
only, suppose that X is discrete, with the densities qt giving probabilities (that is, they are
densities relative to the counting measure).
First note that, by virtue of Rust’s (1987) assumptions, the density q1(x) ¼ Pr(X1 ¼ x)
 1g) are
and the transition density qtþ1(x|a, Xt)¼Pr(Xtþ1 ¼x|At ¼a, Xt) (for t 2 f1; . . . ; T
directly identified from the data. Moreover, for t 2 T , the conditional choice probability
pt(a|Xt)  Pr(At ¼ a|Xt) identifies an average over at(Xt, Wt) that is free from dynamic
selection bias and that coincides with the probability that an individual agent would attach
to choosing a in period t if she would know Xt but not yet Wt. Finally, the density f of the
data conveniently factorizes as
f ½ðA1 ; X1 Þ; . . . ; ðAT ; XT Þ ¼ q1 ðX1 Þp1 ðA1 j X1 Þ


T
Y

qt ðXt j At 1 ; Xt 1 Þpt ðAt j Xt Þ:

ð6Þ

t¼2

This suggests that the conditional choice probabilities can be used to identify Ut and Gt
using results on the identification of static discrete choice models. A simple example
clarifies this point. Suppose that the components of Wt are independently distributed with
type I extreme value distributions. This fixes Gt and implies that the conditional choice
probabilities have the well-known multinomial logit form:
exp½Ut ða; Xt Þ
; a 2 At ðXt Þ:
b2At ðXt Þ exp½Ut ðb; Xt Þ

pt ða j Xt Þ ¼ P

Thus, for any two actions a, ap 2 At(Xt), the log odds ratio ln[pt(a|Xt)/pt(ap |Xt)] identifies
the choice-specific value contrast Ut(a, Xt) Ut(ap, Xt), and this is all the information that
can possibly be pulled from the conditional choice data. Hotz & Miller (1993) show that
this inversion of the conditional choice probabilities for the logit case generalizes: For any
given Gt, type I extreme value or other distribution, choice-specific value contrasts are
uniquely determined by the choice probabilities.
Now, as pointed out by Rust (1994), this is not sufficient for identification: If Ut(a, Xt)
produces the choice probability data, then so does Ũt (a, Xt)  Ut (a, Xt) þ ht(Xt). In Rust’s
stationary, infinite-horizon case, this corresponds to a particular transformation of the
utility function,
Z
~ða; Xt Þ ¼ uða; Xt Þ þ hðXt Þ r hðx0 Þqðx0 j a; Xt Þdx0 :
u
This is a manifestation of the standard problem in static discrete choice analysis that only
utility contrasts are identified.
372

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Even if we settle this problem by fixing the choice-specific value in one of the alternative
choices, for each possible state in X , the model is not identified. For expositional
convenience, suppose that At(Xt) ¼ A, and set Ut (J, ) ¼ 0. Then Ut(a, Xt) is identified,
but ut(a, Xt) is not. In particular, whatever the underlying primitives really are, a static
model, with discount factor 0 and utility function ũt ¼Ut, rationalizes the choice data
(Manski 1993, Rust 1994).
Magnac & Thesmar (2002) make the degree of underidentification of the model under
conditional independence precise by showing that, in general, fixing r, Gt, and the utilities ut
and terminal value UT in one (feasible) reference alternative is just enough for identification.
From Equation 5, it is clear that exclusion restrictions on the utilities ut facilitate the
identification of r. Fix Gt and assume that Ut is identified. It is shown above that this is not
sufficient to identify ut and r. Now suppose that a state variable is excluded from ut but
affects the choice-specific values through its effect on the transitions of the other state
variables and forward-looking preferences (r > 0). Then, the corresponding choice data
cannot be rationalized with a static model (r ¼ 0). Stationarity of utilities can be used as an
exclusion restriction: If ut does not depend on t, but Qtþ1 does, then time variation in
choice-specific values can be used to pin down r.
By itself, without time variation in Qtþ1, a stationarity restriction does not break the
nonidentification of r. It does, however, avoid the need to specify the terminal value: Bajari
et al. (2009) prove identification for the stationary, infinite-horizon case given that r, G,
and the utility u in one reference alternative are fixed.
In empirical research, functional form restrictions are common sources of identification. A specific example is the extreme value specification of Gt. More generally, identification results like Matzkin’s (1992) for static discrete choice models suggest that Gt and
choice-specific value contrasts can be identified nonparametrically provided these functions satisfy certain shape restrictions.
Finally, data on choices and state variables are sometimes complemented with information
on choice-specific outcomes and other measurements that are informative on the unobservables. Restrictions imposed by economic theory across choices and outcomes can be powerful
sources of identification. Sections 2.4 and 2.5 provide further discussion and examples.
2.2.3. Relaxing conditional independence. In many economic applications, agents are
likely to have better information about their futures than the econometrician. If they act
on this superior information, then Rust’s (1987) conditional independence assumption
typically breaks down. This motivates augmenting this section’s framework with
unobserved persistent state variables. In such an augmented framework, the observed
history of the state variables and actions not only causally determines the agent’s current
state, but is also statistically informative on the agent’s unobserved persistent state. Consequently, the observed state and choice dynamics confound agent-level state dependence
with dynamic selection effects (Heckman 1981).
Before we review recent attempts to address this problem in the next few sections, it is
useful to recall why this is difficult. To this end, consider the observational implications of
the conditional independence assumption. It is immediately clear from the factorization of
the data density in Equation 6 that, together with the Markov assumption, conditional
independence substantially restricts time-series variation in the data. However, in isolation
from the Markov restriction, conditional independence has little bite: If we allow for full
(non-Markov) dependence of observed states and choices on their histories, we can match
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

373

any given data distribution without dynamic selection on unobservables (see also
Abbring & Heckman 2007, sections 3.2.1.2 and 3.2.2.2). This underscores the key role of
the Markov restriction, combined with stationarity and other restrictions, in the identification of models with unobserved persistent states.

2.3. Discrete Unobserved Heterogeneity

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

The simplest way to endow agents with better information than the econometrician is to
allow for permanent differences between agents of which the agents are aware, but that the
econometrician does not observe. To this end, augment the state variables of the previous
section’s model with a permanent unobserved heterogeneity component V: St ¼ (Xt ,Wt,V),
where, as before, Xt and Wt are time-varying observed and unobserved state variables.
We assume that V has a discrete distribution, with finite support {v1, v2, . . . , vK}. This
specification has been popular since it appeared in Heckman & Singer’s (1984b) nonparametric estimator of the MPH model. It has been promoted and used in the context of
dynamic discrete decision processes by Eckstein & Wolpin (1990, 1999) and Keane &
Wolpin (1997), among others.
2.3.1. Mixture setup and identification. All primitives, including Q1 and UT , may generally depend on V, with ut (a,Xt,Wt,V) ¼ ut(a,Xt,V) þ Wt(a). For expositional convenience,
we focus on binary choice and set At (St) ¼ {0,1}. We now assume that conditional independence of {Xt,Wt} holds conditional on V. This ensures that a mixed version of the
factorization in Equation 6 holds:
f ½ðA1 ; X1 Þ; . . . ; ðAT ; XT Þ

T
K
Y
X
pk q1 ðX1 j vk Þp1 ðA1 j X1 ; vk Þ qt ðXt j At 1 ; Xt 1 ; vk Þpt ðAt j Xt ; vk Þ;
¼
k¼1

ð7Þ

t¼2

where pk  Pr(V ¼ vk) > 0. Because of conditional independence, V is the only source of
dynamic selection. Consequently, the components in the right-hand side of Equation 7
have structural interpretations. In particular, qt (Xt |At 1, Xt 1, vk) is the true transition density of Xt for an agent with V ¼ vk, and the conditional choice probabilities
pt (At |Xt, vk) again identify an average over the decision rules that is free from dynamic
selection bias. However, in contrast to Section 2.2, neither these components nor the initial
state density q1 are directly identified.
Kasahara & Shimotsu (2009) recently adapted and extended results on the identification of finite mixtures to variants of this framework. Their approach takes mixtures such
as Equation 7 as given and explores identification of the components of its right-hand side
from the data in its left-hand side. Their analysis neither requires nor exploits these
components’ structural interpretation; in particular, they do not use the structure of the
Markov discrete decision framework. Thus, an application to this structural framework is
an example of a two-stage approach to identification: First, heterogeneity is separated from
structural state transition and choice components; second, the decision problem’s primitives are determined from the latter, using results similar to those in Section 2.2.
2.3.2. Baseline case. We first review Kasahara & Shimotsu’s baseline analysis. This anal
ysis studies a special case of Equation 7, with the transition densities qt, t 2 f2; . . . ; Tg,
374

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

independent of V and the conditional choice probabilities pt independent of t. This baseline
case is of particular interest to this review because it can be structurally applied. It corresponds to a stationary infinite-horizon Markov decision model with heterogeneity in static
and dynamic preferences and heterogeneous initial conditions, but with homogeneous state
transitions (see also Kasahara & Shimotsu 2009, example 2).
Note that Kasahara & Shimotsu in fact allow for general (non-Markov) dependence of
Xt on the observed state and choice history. They also allow the initial conditional choice
probability p1 to differ from the stationary conditional choice probability p. However,
neither these extensions nor, in fact, the time dependence of the state transition probabilities are consistent with a structural interpretation of the stationary conditional choice
probabilities p and the initial conditions. Therefore, we ignore these extensions here.
For expositional convenience, as in the previous section and following Kasahara &
Shimotsu, suppose that X is discrete and that the densities qt are probabilities. In the
baseline case, as in Section 2.2, the structural transition densities are identified directly by
qtþ1(x|a, Xt) ¼ Pr(Xtþ1 ¼ x|At ¼ a, Xt ). They can also be taken outside the mixture in the
right-hand side of Equation 7, so that we can focus on identification of the components of
the right-hand side of
f ½ðA1 ; X1 Þ; . . . ; ðAT ; XT Þ
f  ½ðA1 ; X1 Þ; . . . ; ðAT ; XT Þ  Y 
T 1
qtþ1 ðXtþ1 j At ; Xt Þ
t¼1


K
T
Y
X
pk q1 ðX1 j vk Þ pðAt j Xt ; vk Þ
¼

ð8Þ

t¼1

k¼1
p

from f . For a given evaluation point of ðX1 ; . . . ; XT Þ, the right-hand side is a (defective)
 binary choice probabilities. The identification
finite discrete mixture over the product of T
of such mixtures has been studied in psychometrics, biometrics, and econometrics in the
1950s (e.g., Anderson 1954). Kasahara & Shimotsu substantially improve on these results
by exploiting variation with the observed state paths ðX1 ; . . . ; XT Þ and not only marginal
sequences of binary outcomes.
The key idea in this approach is that a rich set of restrictions on the component densities
and the mixing probabilities can be constructed by evaluating a range of marginal versions
of Equation 8. Assume that Q1, Qtþ1(|0, Xt), and Qtþ1(|1, Xt) have full support X ,
 ¼ 3 and (x1, x2, x3) 2 X . Then, directly evaluating Equation 8 at
almost surely. Let T
[(1, x1), (1, x2), (1, x3)] gives one restriction,
fxx21;x3  f  ½ð1; x1 Þ; ð1; x2 Þ; ð1; x3 Þ ¼

K
X

pk q1 ðx1 j vk Þ

3
Y

pð1 j xt ; vk Þ:

ð9Þ

t¼1

k¼1

First integrating out (A1, X1) from Equation 8 and then evaluating at [(1, x2), (1, x3)] give
another,
fx2 ;x3 

1 X
X

f  ½ða1 ; x1 Þ; ð1; x2 Þ; ð1; x3 Þ ¼

a1 ¼0 x1 2X

K
X
k¼1

pk

3
Y

pð1 j xt ; vk Þ:

ð10Þ

t¼2

Similarly, we can derive a range of additional restrictions by integrating over one or more
of (A1, X1), A2, and A3 and evaluating. Denote the result of integrating the left-hand side
of Equation 8 over A3 with fxx21 , the result of integrating over A2 and A3 with f x1 , and so on.
Then, we have
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

375

fxx21 ¼

K
X
pk q1 ðx1 j vk Þpð1 j x1 ; vk Þpð1 j x2 ; vk Þ;
k¼1

fxx31

K
X
¼
pk q1 ðx1 j vk Þpð1 j x1 ; vk Þpð1 j x3 ; vk Þ;

f x1

K
X
¼
pk q1 ðx1 j vk Þpð1 j x1 ; vk Þ;

k¼1

fx2 ¼
fx3 ¼

ð11Þ

k¼1
K
X

pk pð1 j x2 ; vk Þ; and

k¼1
K
X

pk pð1 j x3 ; vk Þ:

k¼1

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Without covariates, that is, if X contains only one element (x1, x2, x3), this gives
seven restrictions, corresponding to the seven probabilities that characterize the
distribution of the eight possible binary choice paths (a1, a2, a3) 2 {0,1}3. In this case, because
P
q1(x1 |vk) ¼ 1 and K
k¼1 pk ¼ 1, we need to determine 3K conditional choice probabilities
and K 1 mixing probabilities. Therefore, we can identify at most the case with K ¼ 2 types,
which would have exactly seven unknown parameters. Indeed, Anderson (1954) gives suffi 2K 1, and others have improved on his results.
cient conditions for identification if T
Kasahara & Shimotsu’s contribution to the baseline case is to note that Equations 9–11
may yield different restrictions for different covariate paths (x1, x2, x3) 2 X 3 and to develop
 ¼ 3 when covariate variation is available.
sufficient conditions for identification with T
Their analysis is intuitive and close in spirit to classical contributions such as Anderson’s
(1954). It is instructive to review it here.
For x 2 X and x  (x1, . . . , xK 1) 2 X K 1, let
2
3
1 pð1 j x1 ; v1 Þ . . . pð1 j xK 1 ; v1 Þ
6
7
..
Lx  4 ⋮
5
⋮
⋮
.
1 pð1 j x1 ; vK Þ . . . pð1 j xK 1 ; vK Þ
be a K

K matrix with conditional choice probabilities,
Dx  diag½q1 ðx j v1 Þpð1 j x; v1 Þ; . . . ; q1 ðx j vK Þ pð1 j x; vK Þ

a K K diagonal matrix with initial state and choice probabilities on its diagonal, and P 
diag(p1, . . . , pK) a K K diagonal matrix with mixing probabilities. These are parameters to
be identified. Collect corresponding probabilities known from the data in two K K matrices,
2
3
1
fx1
...
fxK 1
6 fx
fx1 ;x1 . . . fx1 ;xK 1 7
6 1
7
Fx  6
7
..
4 ⋮
.
⋮
⋮ 5
fxK 1 fxK 1 ;x1 . . . fxK 1 ;xK 1
and
2

fx
6 fxx
6 1
Fxx  6
4 ⋮
fxxK 1
376

Abbring

fxx1 ;x1

...
...

⋮
fxxK 1 ;x1

...

fxx1

..

.

fxxK

3
1

fxx1 ;xK
fxxK

1

⋮
1 ;xK 1

7
7
7:
5

Then,

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Fx ¼ L0x PLx and Fxx ¼ L0x Dx PLx

ð12Þ

express data in terms of the mixing components and probabilities.
Kasahara & Shimotsu note that the model can be identified if the equations in Equation
12 can be inverted for some x 2 X and x 2 X K 1. They give the following sufficient
conditions for this: There exist (a) a x 2 X K 1 such that Lx is full rank and (b) an x 2 X
such that Dk is full rank, with none of its K diagonal elements identical (Kasahara &
Shimotsu 2009, proposition 1). They sketch the following constructive proof. Take x 2 X
and x 2 X K 1 that satisfy their conditions for identification. Then, Fx and Lx are invertible.
From Equation 12, it follows that Fx 1 Fxx ¼ Lx 1 DxLx. Consequently, the eigenvalues
of Fx 1 Fxx identify Dx (up to the ordering of the K unobserved groups). With this
in hand, Fx 1FxxLx 1 ¼ Lx 1Dx suggests that the columns of Lx 1 can be identified with
the corresponding eigenvectors of Fx 1 Fxx . Finally, the mixing probabilities follow from
0
P ¼ (Lx ) 1 FxLx 1.
 ¼ 3 because it subThis argument is close to the classical proofs but only requires T
stitutes variation with covariates for repeated choice observations. Kasahara & Shimotsu’s
identification conditions ensure that there is sufficient variation in the component distributions with the covariates. They are high-level conditions that can be verified directly in the
data: Kasahara & Shimotsu (2009, corollary 1) show that it is sufficient that there exist
x 2 X and x 2 X K 1 such that Fx is full rank and all eigenvalues of Fx 1 Fxx are distinct.
 ¼ 3 but can be restored using
If either of these conditions fails, identification fails with T
 > 3). As they duly note, this would take us
their alternative result for longer panels (T
closer to the classical framework.
The data are also informative on the number K of unobserved types. Kasahara &
Shimotsu present a lower bound on K that can be computed from data on two periods
 ¼ 2) only. They prove that, under additional rank conditions that cannot be empirically
(T
verified, K equals this lower bound.
2.3.3. Extensions. The baseline model requires stationarity and Markov restrictions, and
independence of the observed state transition from the unobserved heterogeneity. Moreover, the assumption that Q1 and Qtþ1 have full support X , almost surely, excludes that the
state Xt, and thus the conditional choice probabilities, includes past choices. It also forbids
monotone state processes such as Rust’s (1987) bus mileage. In structural applications to
dynamic discrete choice processes, these conditions may be impractical. For example, in
the finite-horizon setting that is often used, we need to account for nonstationarity.
Kasahara & Shimotsu (2009) derive a range of additional results that relax one or more
of these conditions, using versions of the approach for the baseline case. The main limitation of their analysis is that it does not simultaneously allow for state dependence—which
they define as dependence of conditional choice probabilities on past choices—and
nonstationarity.

2.4. Unobserved Markov State
A simple generalization of a permanent unobserved heterogeneity component allows this
component to be updated according to a Markov process. Hu & Shum (2009) analyze the
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

377

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

identification of such a generalization, applying results from the literature on nonlinear
measurement error models. Like Kasahara & Shimotsu (2009), they focus on first-stage
identification based on high-level assumptions and do not exploit restrictions from economic theory.
This section and the next instead focus on the identifying power of cross-equation
restrictions on choice and covariate data augmented with information on choice-specific
outcomes and auxiliary measurements. This approach is motivated by Heckman &
Honoré’s (1989) analysis of the empirical content of Roy’s (1951) model of sector choice
and earnings. In this static model, agents choose to work in the sector where they earn
the most. In addition to sector choices A and state variables X that affect sectoral
earnings, earnings in the sector where an agent works [in our notation, u(A, X)þW(A)]
are observed. Note that, unlike Section 2.2’s state variables, these earnings are directly
informative on the unobservables. Heckman & Honoré provide both parametric identification results and nonparametric results that rely on large variation of sectoral earnings
with the covariates.
Keane & Wolpin (1997) estimate a dynamic extension of Roy’s model. The next two
sections provide dynamic examples of the parametric and nonparametric approaches to the
identification of such models. We first discuss Abbring & Campbell’s (2005) parametric
analysis of a model of firm growth, learning, and survival. Then, Section 2.5 reviews
Heckman & Navarro’s (2007) nonparametric analysis of a model of schooling choice and
earnings.
2.4.1. Firm growth, learning, and survival. Abbring & Campbell (2005) present a model
of firm growth, learning, and survival. Their main objective is to characterize the accumulation of information to entrepreneurs about their firms’ profitability and to assess the
entrepreneurs’ effectiveness in selecting profitable firms for survival. To this end, their
model distinguishes processes at three information levels. Nature draws a profit-relevant
parameter from a first-order autoregressive process. The agent (entrepreneur) only
observes a noisy measure of this time-varying parameter and, when deciding on firm
survival, uses Bayes’ rule to assess its value and predict his future profits [as in Jovanovic’s
(1982) model of industry evolution]. The econometrician only observes the agent’s survival
decisions and part of the state vector on which these are based. Thus, this model distinguishes between the agent’s and the econometrician’s ignorance about the state of nature.
Abbring & Campbell provide identification results that show that the two can be separated. Their analysis is fully parametric but nevertheless instructive.
Firms enter at time t ¼ 1. In each period t, they decide to either continue into the next
period (At ¼ 0) or to leave permanently (At ¼ 1). A state variable Nt keeps track of
survival: N1 ¼ 1 and Nt ¼ 1 if and only if Nt 1 ¼ 1 and the agent decided to continue in
t 1. If the firm survives to period t(Nt ¼ 1), it will collect period t profits
e 1 expðYt Þ
1

kt expðVÞ:

Here, Yt are log sales; e exp(Yt) is, under some assumptions, the firm’s period t producer’s surplus; and kt exp(V) are fixed production costs. If the firm is not active, it will
have zero payoffs.
Log sales, and therewith profitability, are determined dynamically by a deep process Wtp
that is initialized with a draw from some normal distribution and subsequently evolves,
378

Abbring

independently from the firm’s actions, as a first-order autoregressive normal process with
linear drift. In particular, log sales satisfy

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Yt ¼ Wt þ Vt þ Zt þ V;
where Vtp and Zt are independently and identically distributed normal disturbances, and V
is a permanent normal firm-scale factor. The agent observes Wt  Wtp þ Vtp, Zt, and V, but
not Wtp and Vtp separately. That is, Vtp is a transitory sales shock that the entrepreneur
cannot tell apart from the true persistent state Wtp. If it is nondegenerate, it will affect the
agent’s assessment of the true state (learning) and thus his survival decisions. In contrast,
the other transitory log sales shock, Zt, will not affect the agent’s survival decisions because
it is observed by the agent and unrelated to future profits. Finally, the factor exp(V)
proportionally scales up profits and is known to agents. Abbring & Campbell interpret
exp(V) as an entrepreneur’s choice of scale upon entry, which is heterogeneous because of
heterogeneity in entrepreneurial abilities.
When deciding on survival at time t, the agent knows V and the histories of Nt, Yt, Wt,
and Zt up to and including time t; the agent also knows all the model’s parameters,
including the fixed cost sequence {kt}. Period t profits depend on Nt, Yt, and V but not on
the agent’s current survival decision. Because of normality, the agent’s expected discounted
future profits only depend on the observed history through Nt, the agent’s survival deci^   E½W  j W1 ; . . . ; Wt  of Wtp, and time t. Moreover,
sion, V, the posterior mean W
t
t
the agent can use the Kalman filter to recursively compute the posterior mean Ŵtp from
Ŵtp 1 and Wt. Because exp(V) simply multiplies the expected discounted profits under
survival, and the payoffs under exit are zero, V does not affect the survival decision. If
Nt ¼ 1, the agent will survive if and only if Ŵtp exceeds a threshold wt . The threshold varies
with time, because the (foreseen) parameters may vary with time and because Ŵtp is
nonstationary under learning.
One possible specification of the agent’s state is St ¼ (Nt,Yt,Ŵtp,V). In terms of Section
2.1’s framework,


ut ðSt Þ ¼ Nt e 1 expðYt Þ kt expðVÞ :
The econometrician only observes At (and Ntþ1) and Yt if Nt ¼ 1 :
½ðN1 A1 ; N1 Y1 Þ; . . . ; ðNT AT ; NT YT Þ:
This establishes the hierarchy of information that is key to the model’s econometric
implementation: The econometrician only observes a noisy measure of the agent’s state,
(Nt, NtYt). It should be clear that the state transition process does not satisfy Section 2.2’s
conditional independence assumption. In fact, even conditional on V, the agent’s assessment Ŵtp of the state of nature will help in predicting the next period’s sales. Moreover, the
unobservables cannot be determined from a monotonic relation with observed variables, as
in Olley & Pakes (1996) and Aguirregabiria (2010). Instead, we follow a parametric
identification strategy that exploits cross-equation restrictions.
2.4.2. Parametric identification using cross-equation restrictions. Clearly, from the log
sales data only, we cannot tell its various components apart. However, Abbring &
Campbell show that the model can be identified if we combine the sales information with
choice data. In particular, they show that the parameters of the structural components of
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

379

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

the log sales process, and the relevant survival thresholds w1 ; . . . ; w T , can be identified if
 3. They provide intuition based on three ideas from the literature.
T
First, because survival decisions only depend on Wt ¼ Wtp þ Vtp and not on Zt and V, the
covariance of log sales with the survival decision can be used to separate Wt, on the one
hand, from Zt and V, on the other hand. This approach is inspired by Friedman’s (1957)
seminal work on the permanent income hypothesis and the subsequent literature that uses
the covariance of current income with consumption to disentangle permanent and transitory income shocks.
Second, once we can measure the agent’s state without econometric noise, we can apply
Pakes & Ericson’s (1998) test for Bayesian learning and separate the true state Wtp from
the noise Vtp in the agent’s observations of it. In particular, without learning (that is, if
Wt ¼ Wtp), Wt is a first-order Markov process. With learning, the full history of Wt helps
predicting it.
Finally, log sales are persistent for two reasons: the structural autocorrelation of the
latent process Wtp and heterogeneity in V across firms. In the absence of selection on
unobservables, the autoregression of S2 on S1 given N2 ¼ 1 would be linear. With selection,
this autoregression involves a Heckman (1979) selection term. Abbring & Campbell argue
that this selection term is informative on the relative importance of both sources of persistence because survival only depends on Wtp and not on V.
This determines the agent’s decision rules together with the parameters of the state
processes, without solving his optimization problem. Abbring & Campbell complement
this first-stage identification result with a second-stage analysis of the identification of the
remaining primitives, using the optimization problem’s structure. Under some assumptions
on the time variation in the parameters, they find that the fixed cost pattern, the firm’s
value, and the value of the agent’s exit option can be identified up to a common scale.
In contrast to most of the results reviewed here, Abbring & Campbell’s analysis is firmly
parametric. Their stated intuition, however, suggests that, in part, their analysis could be
extended to more flexible specifications. Indeed, their proofs already apply to models that
do not impose the full second-stage structure and allow for semiparametric components,
such as a general nonparametric autoregression for the state process Wt. However, key
aspects of their model remain parametric.

2.5. General Unobservables
In some applications, it is possible to generate lots of independent variation in, for example, payoffs across periods by varying external covariates. For instance, in their analysis of
patent renewal, Pakes & Simpson (1989) entertain unobserved Markov returns to patents.
They use an identification at infinity strategy, driven by external patent renewal cost
variation.
Cameron & Heckman (1998) use such a strategy in their analysis of schooling choices
with an ordered choice model. Cunha et al. (2007) extend their framework by allowing the
thresholds that demarcate the ordered choices to depend on observed and unobserved
covariates. They provide conditions under which the resulting ordered choice model can
represent a dynamic optimal stopping model of schooling, with the thresholds reflecting
marginal returns to schooling. Under these conditions, their identification analysis, in the
spirit of Cameron & Heckman, applies to the corresponding dynamic discrete choice
model. Taber (2000) analyzes a simple two-period version of a dynamic programming
380

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

model with a very general error structure. Each of these papers exemplifies the power of
the identification at infinity approach, when available.
Here we review a more recent contribution by Heckman & Navarro (2007). They extend
Taber’s (2000) analysis to a general finite-horizon model with information updating based on
a factor model, augmented with choice-specific outcomes and auxiliary measurements.
2.5.1. Setup. Heckman & Navarro (2007) study schooling choices and their effects on

earnings (see also Abbring & Heckman 2007). Time is indexed with t 2 T  f1; 2; . . . ; Tg,
 At time 1, an agent starts in school. She receives period 1’s utility
for some finite time T.
from being in school and decides, based on the information available to her, whether to
remain in school or leave school after the first period. If the agent is still in school at time
  g, for some T
  T
 1, she similarly collects state-dependent utility and
t 2 f2; . . . ; T
decides whether to continue in school for another period. No more schooling is available
  þ 1, so if the agent is still in school at time T
  þ 1, she has no other choice
after period T
than to leave. Once the agent is out of school, by choice or by passing the highest available
schooling level, she cannot return, and she collects the state-dependent utility from being
 The agent’s schooling choices maximize expected discounted
out of school until time T.
utility.
Denote the schooling decision at time t with At, where At ¼ 1 if the agent decides to stop
schooling before the next period and At ¼ 0 if the agent remains in school. Let Nt indicate
the agent’s schooling state at time t. Initialize N1 ¼ 0 and set Ntþ1 ¼ 0 if Nt ¼ 0 and the
agent decides in period t to continue in school (At ¼ 0). If the agent has left school by
period t (Nt > 0) or decides to leave after period t (Nt ¼ 0 and At ¼ 1), then Ntþ1 ¼ Nt þ1.
That is, Nt counts the periods the agent has experienced out of school, starting at 1 in the
first year after leaving school. This experience will be one determinant of earnings. Note
  1g and t 1.
that, in period t, it can only take values between maxf0; t T
y
c
The state at time t is St ¼ (Nt,X,Wt). Here, X  (X , X ) contains state variables that
are observed by both the econometrician and the agent. These may include paths of
schooling cost and earnings shifters that are perfectly foreseen by the agent from time 1.
The variables in Wt are state variables in the agent’s information set at time t but are not
known to the econometrician. We discuss their structure later.
Utility ut in period t depends on the state St but not on the concurrent schooling choice.
It equals the state-dependent earnings yt (St) net of the schooling costs ct (St):
ut ðSt Þ ¼ yt ðSt Þ

ct ðSt Þ;

where
yt ðSt Þ ¼ my ðt; Nt ; Xy Þ þ Zyt ðNt Þ
and
ct ðSt Þ ¼ mc ðt; Xy ; Xc Þ þ Zct :
Here, my and mc are deterministic functions, and Zty(n), for all feasible values n of Nt, and
Ztc are mean zero shocks that are independent of X.
A key distinguishing feature of Heckman & Navarro’s analysis is their specification of
the agent’s information structure. Note that we have already assumed that X is known to
the agent from period 1. Moreover, they also make the standard assumption that all the
model’s parameters are known to the agent.
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

381

It remains to specify the content of the state variables Wt that are not observed by the
econometrician. For this, they specify dynamic factor models for both Zty and Ztc and make
assumptions on the way agents accumulate information on the factors and on the uniquenesses (i.e., the idiosyncratic errors in the factor model). In particular, they specify
Zyt ðnÞ ¼ V 0 nyt;n þ yt;n and Zct ¼ V 0 nct þ ct ;

ð13Þ

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

where V is a vector of time-invariant factors, nyt;n and nct are state-dependent vectors of
factor loadings, and yt;n and ct are the (zero-mean) uniquenesses. The factors and scalar
components of the uniquenesses are all mutually independent, and independent of X.
Heckman & Navarro now make a set of assumptions on the agent’s information structure
that allows for information updating but excludes nontrivial Bayesian updating. (a) All the
cost uniquenesses {tc} are known to the agent from the start. (b) At time t, only past and
current earnings uniquenesses {y1,n, . . . , yt,n} are known to the agent. (c) The factors in V are
sequentially and fully revealed to the agent. That is, a factor is either known or unknown at
time t, and if it is known at time t, then it is known at all later times. Moreover, the factor
loadings in Equation 13 are restricted so that all factors that affect Zty(n) and Ztc are known at
time t. Thus, Wt includes all cost uniquenesses, all past and current earnings uniquenesses,
and those factors that have been revealed by time t. Note that not all uniquenesses that the
agent knows are actually relevant to her payoffs and decisions. For example, past schooling
cost shocks are known but need not necessarily be included in the state Wt.
Heckman & Navarro take the information structure as given. Cunha et al. (2005)
discuss identification of the information structure.
2.5.2. Nonparametric identification. Now suppose we have data on the schooling choices
ðA1 ; . . . ; AT  Þ, or, equivalently, the schooling outcomes ðN1 ; . . . ; NT Þ; the earnings and cost
 and a vector of external meashifters X; the agent’s earnings Yt  yt(St), t 2 f1; . . . ; Tg;
surements M. Note that the earnings data only provide information on the agent’s actual
earnings; we do not directly observe the counterfactual earnings yt(s) in states s 6¼ St.
The vector M contains variables that are not state variables or outcomes of the model
but that are informative on certain aspects of the model, notably the latent factors V. For
example, some of the factors could be ability, and M could be test scores that are noisy
measurements of ability. Heckman & Navarro specify M ¼ mM(X) þ ZM and impose a
factor structure on ZM similar to that for the earnings and cost shocks in Equation 13,
again assuming full independence of the factors and the extended set of uniquenesses.
Informational assumptions on the measurements are needed to ensure that they are truly
external to the model and are not used by the agent to learn about the factors. Here, we
simply assume that these conditions hold.
The identification analysis proceeds in two steps. First, Heckman & Navarro consider
identification of the mean earnings and measurement functions my and mM and of the distributions of the corresponding errors. Note that the measurements’ regression function mM
(and the marginal distribution of the corresponding errors) can be directly identified. Now
consider identification of the means my(t, n, ) for an arbitrary feasible schooling outcome,


 n  Þ in the support of
that is, for the (t, n) on an arbitrary schooling path ð1; n1 Þ; . . . ; ðT;
T


 N  Þ . Heckman & Navarro effectively require that the external cost shifter
ð1; N1 Þ; . . . ; ðT;
T
c
X can be varied, independently of Xy, so that this schooling outcome occurs with probability
one. This allows for the identification at infinity of the corresponding means my(t, n, )
382

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

without selection bias. This can be repeated for all feasible schooling outcomes, yielding
identification of my(t, n, ) for all feasible pairs (t, n). With these means in hand, the joint
distribution of the external measurements’ errors and the earnings errors corresponding to a
given feasible schooling outcome follows from a similar limit argument. None of this
requires the factor structure on the errors. The full joint distribution of the errors, however,
can only be identified using factor analysis.
Second, they consider identification of the full structural model. Their approach is
based on a standard recursive formulation of the agent’s decision problem and sequentially
  backward to
applies identification at infinity arguments from the last decision time T
time 1. For each decision time in that sequence, this requires that they can independently
vary the schooling costs in earlier periods so that the agents start in school at that time with
probability one. Then, they can apply results on the nonparametric identification of static
binary choice models (Matzkin 1992) to back out the parameters that appear in that
period’s schooling choice. Along the way, the scale of the cost functions needs to be
determined, for example, by assuming that the schooling costs contain an additive component that is observed and measured on the same scale as earnings, such as tuition. Factor
analysis is again used to identify joint distributions of the errors.

3. HAZARD MODELS
Hazard models naturally arise in applications in which agents make discrete decisions at
random and discrete (Poisson) times (Heckman & Singer 1985, 1986). A prime example of
such an application is the empirical analysis of labor market transitions using sequential
job search models. Labor economists have both empirically implemented job search
models as structural models (Eckstein & Van den Berg 2007) and used such models to
motivate the application of MPH models (Van den Berg 2001). This section briefly reviews
the current state of affairs in the identifiability of hazard models.

3.1. Hazards in Job Search and Insurance
In a basic sequential job search model, agents receive job offers at a (possibly, controlled)
Poisson rate, and once a job offer arrives, they decide between accepting the offer or
continuing to search without recall of the offer. The resulting hazard rate for the transition
from unemployment to employment is the product of the job-offer arrival rate and the
probability that a job offer is acceptable. In the simplest such setting, the job-offer arrival
rate and the job-offer distribution are taken to be primitives, which may vary between agents
and over time. Under some regularity conditions, the agent’s decision rule is to accept any job
that offers a wage above some agent-specific and time-dependent reservation wage.
Flinn & Heckman (1982) provide a seminal analysis of the identifiability of this model’s
primitives from unemployment duration and accepted wage data. One of their main results is
that even a homogeneous and stationary version of this model is not identified, unless the
class of job-offer distributions is restricted to satisfy a recoverability condition that ensures
that the job-offer distribution can be uniquely determined from a left truncated version of it,
the accepted wage distribution. Plainly, the effects of the job-offer arrival rate and of the job
acceptance behavior on the hazard rate cannot be separated without such a condition. Later
work has made some progress in resolving the recoverability problem, for example, by using
equilibrium restrictions on wage-offer distributions (e.g., Eckstein & Van den Berg 2007).
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

383

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Search models have been much applied since to the empirical analysis of labor markets
(reviewed in Eckstein & Van den Berg 2007). Closely related models have recently
appeared in the empirical literature on asymmetric information problems in insurance.
For example, in their analyses of moral hazard in car insurance, Abbring et al. (2003,
2008) specify models of an agent’s driving risk and claim behavior under experience rating.
In these models, insured losses arrive at a controlled Poisson rate; loss sizes are drawn from
some primitive distribution; and agents only claim losses that exceed a state-dependent
threshold, because of experience rating.
Progress in the analysis of the identification of such structural models driven by Poisson
processes has been limited to specific applications. Here, we focus on more generally
applicable insights that can be derived from the extensive parallel literature on the
identifiability of the MPH model. This is an extension of Cox’s (1972) proportional
hazards model with a multiplicative unobserved heterogeneity factor. It was introduced
by Lancaster (1979) for the analysis of state dependence and heterogeneity in unemployment duration data. The MPH model has developed since into the main tool for econometric duration analysis, but it has also been criticized for its poor structural foundations. For
example, Van den Berg (2001) points out that sequential search models only lead to MPH
structures under very specific assumptions, and Eckstein & Van den Berg (2007, section
3.1.7) plainly state that proportional hazards and MPH models are only good for descriptive analysis of data generated by job search models. This problem is not restricted to labor
economics: Abbring et al.’s (2008) insurance model implies general interactions between
individual characteristics and time.
Nevertheless, there are at least four reasons to review some key identification results for
the MPH model. First, MPH results can be applied in those few specific circumstances that
search models actually lead to MPH structures. Second, even if search or insurance models
do not lead to proportional hazards, hazard models remain the most natural framework for
the analysis of decisions taken at random discrete times. Insights from the MPH literature
may help in developing identification results for nonproportional models with better structural foundations. Third, MPH results have recently been applied to an (essentially static)
optimal stopping game by Honoré & de Paula (2008), and recent developments in the
computation of dynamic games suggest a role for hazard models (see Section 5). Finally,
the analysis of the MPH model can be applied to a completely different class of models,
mixed hitting-time (MHT) models, that are closer in spirit to Section 2’s discrete-time
models and better embedded in economic theory. This is the subject of Section 4.

3.2. Mixed Proportional Hazards Model
We first introduce the MPH model and its implications for data on durations and
covariates. Then, we briefly review the literature on its identification.
3.2.1. Setup. Suppose we have data on a continuous random time T and time-invariant
covariates X. The MPH model specifies the hazard rate
yðt j X; V Þ  lim
dt#0

Prðt  T5t þ dt j X;V Þ=dt
PrðT t j X;V Þ

of T conditional on X and a scalar unobserved heterogeneity factor V as
384

Abbring

yðt j X; VÞ ¼ lðtÞfðXÞV;
Rt
where the baseline hazard l: [0, 1) ! (0, 1) has an integral LðtÞ  0 lðtÞdt for all finite t,
f: X ! (0,1) is a measurable function of the covariates, and V is distributed independently from X on (0,1) with distribution function G. We assume that limt!1 LðtÞ ¼ 1;
with the assumption that f(X)V is positive, this ensures that the distributions of T|(X, V)
and T|X are nondefective [Abbring (2002) discusses identifiability of the extension with
general defects, which may be of applied interest]. It follows that Pr(T > t | X, V) ¼ exp
[ L(t)f(X)V], so that

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

R

PrðT > t j XÞ ¼ L½LðtÞfðXÞ;

ð14Þ

where L(s)  exp( sn)dG(n), s 2 [0, 1), is the Laplace transform of G. The Laplace
transform L uniquely determines G (Feller 1971, section XIII.1, theorem 1), and we interchangeably talk about determining L and G in our review of the MPH model’s identification.
Equation 14 expresses the data, specifically the survival function of T |X, in terms of the
MPH model’s primitives, the triplet (L, f, L) (the marginal distribution of X is taken to be
ancillary and is ignored in our identification discussion). We want to know whether this
mapping can be inverted so that the MHT triplet (L, f, G) can be uniquely determined
from the survival function of T|X.

3.2.2. Identification. Following Elbers & Ridder (1982) and Ridder (1990), we focus on
the two-sample case in which X takes two values, 0 and 1, only. By considering a framework with minimal regressor variation, we minimize the reliance of the identification
results on such variation. Without loss of generality, we specify f(X) ¼ bX for some b 2
(0,1). Note that this implicitly imposes a scale normalization f(0) ¼ 1 on f; this is
innocuous because the scales of L and G, and therefore of y, are free at this point. In
 0 ðtÞ 
this two-sample setup, the data provide us with two survival functions, F

PrðT > t j X ¼ 0Þ and F1 ðtÞ  PrðT > t j X ¼ 1Þ, and the identification question is
0 ; F
 1 Þ.
whether the two-sample MHT triplet (L, b, L) is uniquely determined by ðF
It should be clear upfront that we need nontrivial variation with the regressors: b 6¼ 1.
0 ¼ F
 1 if and only if b ¼ 1. If the data would instead
This is a testable condition because F
 0 and F
 1 , and the identification
indicate that b ¼ 1, then there is no gain from using both F
problem reduces to the question of whether we can identify L and L from the marginal
 0 ðtÞ ¼ F
 1 ðtÞ ¼ L½LðtÞ.
survival function of T. This distribution satisfies PrðT > tÞ ¼ F
~
Clearly, for any two different Laplace transforms L and L, we can construct observation~ 1; LÞ
~ by setting L(t) ¼ L 1[Pr(T > t)] and
ally equivalent MHT triplets (L, 1, L) and ðL;
1
~
~ ½PrðT > tÞ, t 2 [0,1). Thus, if b ¼ 1, the MPH model is underidentified.
LðtÞ
¼L
Therefore, we assume b 6¼ 1 throughout.
The main results in the literature show that the two-sample MPH model is identified up
to an innocuous scale normalization and a power transformation under a regularity condition on the tails of L and L (Ridder 1990, Abbring & Ridder 2009) and that full identification (up to scale) can be achieved by, in addition, fixing the behavior of one of these tails
(Elbers & Ridder 1982, Heckman & Singer 1984a, Ridder & Woutersen 2003). We now
review these results in some detail.
~ b;
~ LÞ
~ are two observationally equivalent MPH triplets.
Suppose that (L,b,L) and ðL;
From Equation 14, it follows that

www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

385

~L
 1 ∘ðF
 1 Þ ¼ L∘ð
~ b
~ 1 Þ;
L∘ðbL 1 Þ ¼ F
0

ð15Þ

where ∘ denotes function composition. Composing both sides of Equation 15 n times with
~n L
~ b
~ 1 Þ. Moreover, we can repeat this analysis with the
themselves yields L∘ðbn L 1 Þ ¼ L∘ð
role of both samples exchanged and derive a similar relation for negative n. Thus, we have
~n L
~ b
~ 1 Þ; n 2 Z:
L∘ðbn L 1 Þ ¼ L∘ð

ð16Þ

~ ¼ L∘L, implies that
~ L
~ ∘L. Observational equivalence, specifically L∘
Now define K  L
1
~
~ b;
~ LÞ
~ if and only if K(s) ¼ s, s 2 [0,1).
also K ¼ L∘L
. Consequently, ðL; b; LÞ ¼ ðL;
More generally, if we can determine K, perhaps up to a few free parameters, then we can
characterize the relation between any two observationally equivalent MHT triplets.
~n KðsÞ ¼ Kðbn sÞ and b
~n K0 ðsÞ ¼ bn K0 ðbn sÞ, so that
From Equation 16, it follows that b
1

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

K0 ðsÞ
K0 ðbn sÞ
¼
; and n 2 Z; s 2 ð0; 1Þ:
KðsÞ Kðbn sÞ=bn

ð17Þ

The limiting behavior of the right-hand side of Equation 17 as |n| ! 1 is key to all
1
~
~ 1 ∘L ¼ L∘L
, this limiting
identification results in the MPH literature. Because K ¼ L
~
~ and L (L).
behavior can be controlled by making assumptions on the tails of L (and L)
Specifically, Abbring & Ridder (2009) show that, under a regularity condition on these
tails, the right-hand side converges to o / s, for some o 2 (0, 1). Consequently, K(s) ¼ dso,
for some d 2 (0, 1). This establishes Ridder’s (1990) theorem 1 for the MPH model: Any
~ b;
~ LÞ
~ satisfy
two observationally equivalent MHT triplets (L,b,L) and ðL;
~ ¼ dLo ; and b
~ ¼ bo ; for some o; d 2 ð0; 1Þ:
~ o Þ; s 2 ½0; 1Þ; L
LðsÞ ¼ Lðds
The parameter d indexes an innocuous reassignment of the hazard’s scale between the
baseline hazard and the unobserved heterogeneity factor. The parameter o, however,
indexes a power transformation with substantial meaning. For example, with a linear
~
integrated baseline L(t) ¼ t, we only know that LðtÞ
¼ dto is Weibull. This implies that
we cannot tell whether the baseline hazard increases (o > 1) or decreases (o 5 1); that is,
we cannot even sign duration dependence of the agent’s hazard.
This motivates making further assumptions that narrow the class of observationally
equivalent models. The literature has invariably strengthened Abbring & Ridder’s (2009)
regularity condition, either by making further assumptions on the right tail of the heterogeneity distribution (Elbers & Ridder 1982, Heckman & Singer 1984a) or by restricting
the behavior of the baseline hazard near zero (Ridder & Woutersen 2003). We review the
two simplest cases. Consider again two observationally equivalent MPH triplets (L, b, L)
~ b;
~ LÞ.
~
and ðL;
In one case, Elbers & Ridder assume that V has a finite mean. Because the mean of a
random variable, if it exists, equals minus the derivative of its Laplace transform at zero, this
~ 0 (0þ)51, where L0 ð0þÞ  lims#0 L0 ðsÞ,
implies that both 0 5 L0 (0þ)51 and 0 5 L
and so on. From the definition of K, because K(0þ) ¼ 0, this gives 05K0 ð0þÞ ¼
~ 0 ½KðsÞ51. Consequently, the right-hand side of Equation 17 converges to
lims#0 L0 ðsÞ=L
K0 (0þ)/[sK0 (0þ)] ¼ 1/s, so that Ridder’s (1990) theorem 1 holds with o ¼ 1.
In another case, Ridder & Woutersen instead assume that the baseline hazard is bounded
away from zero and 1 at zero. Because L 1(0þ) ¼ 0, this implies that 05K0 ð0þÞ ¼

 

~ 0 L 1 ðsÞ =L0 L 1 ðsÞ 51. Consequently, the argument for Elbers & Ridder’s case
lims#0 L
applies.
386

Abbring

Honoré (1993) shows that much of the MPH model’s restrictive assumptions can be
relaxed if stratified data are available, with the multiple observations in each stratum known
to share the same unobserved heterogeneity factor. Similarly, Heckman & Taber (1994) show
that time-varying covariates may help in relaxing some of the model’s assumptions.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

4. HITTING-TIME MODELS
MHT models specify durations as the first times some latent process hits a threshold that
may depend both on observed covariates and unobserved heterogeneity. They imply conditional hazard rates, but, unlike Section 3’s models, they do not specify these directly.
Hitting-time models have been applied to strike durations (Lancaster 1972) and have
inspired the analysis of unemployment durations (Shimer 2008). They have recently gained
popularity in the statistics literature (e.g., Lee & Whitmore 2006) and are closely related to
real options models of investment timing and their multiple-state generalizations. Possible
applications in fields other than labor economics include marriage and divorce, firm entry
and exit, and credit default.
This section discusses recent advances in the identification analysis of a class of MHT
models that explicitly build on Section 3’s results from the MPH literature. We first sketch
the structural background.

4.1. Hitting Times and Optimal Stopping
Hitting times, based on threshold optimal decision rules, naturally arise in economic
models in which agents optimally time discrete actions, with payoffs driven by Brownian
motion (Dixit & Pindyck 1994, Stokey 2009) or more general processes (Kyprianou 2006,
Boyarchenko & Levensdorski 2007).
For example, in McDonald & Siegel’s (1986) real options model of investment timing,
agents are endowed with an option to invest in a project, at a time of their choice.
Investment incurs a given cost; in return, the agent receives the project’s value at the time
of the investment. The log of this value follows a Brownian motion. The agent maximizes
his expected discounted payoffs by investing when the project’s value hits a time-invariant
threshold. Primitive heterogeneity (e.g., variation in initial project values, investment costs,
and discount rates across agents) induces heterogeneity in the threshold. Consequently,
data on investment times and covariates can be analyzed with an MHT model.
To provide more insight into the way primitive heterogeneity may generate threshold
heterogeneity, and thus an MHT structure, we develop a well-known multiple-state version
of this model in somewhat more detail. Following Abbring (2007), we adapt Dixit’s (1989)
model of firm entry and exit to the analysis of unemployment durations.
Consider a labor market in which workers continuously choose between unemployment
and employment. A worker earns a flow b when unemployed and ut  u0 exp[mt þ sBt]
when employed at calendar time t, where {Bt} is a standard Brownian motion. Note that ut
is a geometric Brownian motion with drift, and E[ut] ¼ u0 exp[(m þ s2 / 2)t]. Workers incur
 0 when they enter a job. They
a lump sum cost k 0 when they leave their job and pay k

maximize expected earnings, discounted at a rate r > m þ s2 / 2. From Dixit’s analysis, it
follows that an unemployed worker enters employment when ut increases above ū and
 ¼ k ¼ 0, and u
 ¼ u if k
 > u otherwise.
resigns when ut falls below u , where u




www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

387

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

An MHT model can be applied to an inflow sample of unemployment durations. Normalize the start time of each unemployment spell in the sample to zero. Then, the unemployed start the sampled spell with earnings u0 ¼ u and end their spell when earnings hit the

 u . Define Wt  ln ut ln u and note that {Wt} is a Brownian motion
exit threshold u


with drift term mt. Then, we can equivalently say that workers initially have normalized log
 ln u . From Dixit’s
earnings W0 ¼ 0 and leave for employment when {Wt} hits w  ln u


(1989) analysis, it follows that w varies on [0,1) with observed and unobserved determi
 and k , with w ¼ 0 only in the frictionless limit. Thus, a loglinear specification of
nants of k


the threshold w in terms of the observed and unobserved heterogeneity factors is natural.

Here, we study whether such a model is identified. If it would be, its empirical analysis
would yield estimates of the latent earnings process and the agents’ decision rules. These
could in turn be used as inputs in a further analysis of the model’s remaining primitives.
Thus, we first focus on first-stage identification. Because there are few characterizations of
optimal decision rules for general preference structures that can be put to use in a secondstage identification analysis, such an analysis needs to proceed on a case-by-case basis. We
give one explicit example at the end of this section.

4.2. Mixed Hitting-Time Model
We first introduce the MHT model’s primitives. Then, we characterize its implications for
data on durations and covariates and review some results on its identification.
4.2.1. Setup. Suppose we have data on random durations T. These durations could be, for
example, investment times, strike durations, marriage durations, or credit default times.
We also observe a vector of covariates X, which contains external shifters of those
durations. An MHT model specifies T as the first time that a latent scalar process {Wt; t 2
[0,1)} crosses a threshold that depends on X and some unobservables V. We assume
throughout that Wt is not observed by the econometrician; we discuss the use of timevarying covariates in this framework in Section 5. Thus, MHT models combine features of
Section 2.3’s mixture models and Section 2.4’s models with unobserved states.
Let Tw denote the first time that the latent process {Wt} exceeds a threshold w 2 [0,1).
A (proportional) MHT model specifies that T is the first time that {Wt} crosses f(X)V, or
T ¼ TfðXÞV ;
for some positive measurable function f and positive random variable V, with (X,V)
independent of {Wt}. The hitting times Tw characterize durations for given thresholds w 2
[0, 1) and thus for given individual characteristics (X,V). Variation in f(X)V corresponds
to heterogeneity in individual thresholds. We assume that V is independent of X.
For example, in Section 4.1’s application of Dixit’s (1989) model to unemployment
durations, {Wt} is a Brownian motion with drift that represents normalized earnings in a
job. An agent with given transition costs will leave unemployment if these normalized
earnings exceed a given threshold w. His unemployment durations Tw will have an inverse


Gaussian distribution, and, conditional on X, the observed unemployment durations T will
have a mixed inverse Gaussian distribution.
4.2.2. Characterization for the Lévy case. Abbring (2007) characterizes the MHT model
for the case in which {Wt} is a spectrally negative Lévy process. A Lévy process is
388

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

a process with stationary and independent increments. An important example of a Lévy
process is the scalar Brownian motion with drift, which is the only Lévy process with
continuous sample paths. In general, Lévy processes may have jumps. Key examples of
pure jump Lévy processes are compound Poisson processes, which have independently
and identically distributed jumps at Poisson times. From an econometric perspective, a
Lévy process {Wt} is a semiparametric object that is fully characterized by a drift parameter, the dispersion parameter of its Brownian motion component, and the characteristic
measure of its jump process.
A spectrally negative Lévy process is a Lévy process that has no positive jumps.
Spectrally negative Lévy processes are much easier to analyze than general Lévy processes. In particular, because they cannot jump across a given positive threshold,
under standard regularity conditions, they attain the threshold at the first hitting
time: WTw ¼ w if Tw 5 1. In turn, this ensures that the hitting-time process {Tw} can be
analyzed as in the Brownian motion case, which is a special case of a spectrally negative
Lévy process.
In particular, Abbring (2007) shows that Laplace transform of the distribution of Tw
satisfies
LTw ðsÞ ¼ exp½ LðsÞw:
The characteristic exponent L of the hitting-time process is determined by the parameters
of the latent process {Wt}: its drift parameter, the dispersion parameter of its Brownian
motion component, and the characteristic measure of its jump component. It follows that
the Laplace transform of the distribution of T conditional on (X,V) is given by
LT ðs j X; VÞ ¼ exp½ LðsÞfðXÞV :
Consequently, the Laplace transform of the distribution of T conditional on X equals
LT ðs j XÞ ¼ L½LðsÞfðXÞ;

ð18Þ

where L is the Laplace transform of the distribution of V.
Equation 18 expresses an object that can be estimated from data—recall that, for
given s, LT (s|X) is simply a moment of the distribution of T|X—in terms of the
model primitives: L, L, and f. The identification question is whether this mapping can
be inverted, that is, whether we can uniquely determine the MHT triplet (L, f, L) from
data on LT (|X). If we can, in turn, L uniquely determines the distribution of
the unobserved heterogeneity factor V, and the characteristic exponent L fully characterizes the distributional properties of the hitting-time process {Tw} and of the latent
Lévy process {Wt}.
4.2.3. Identification. The key insight in Abbring (2007) is that the expression for the
Laplace transform of the distribution of T|X (Equation 18) has the same functional form
as the expression for its survival function in the MPH model (Equation 14). That is, the
MHT and MPH models are not substantially the same—after all, completely different
representations of the data satisfy the same expression—but their identification can be
analyzed in parallel.
Consider the special case that {Wt} is a Brownian motion with drift parameter m 2 [0,1)
and dispersion parameter s 2 (0,1). Then, Equation 18 holds, with

www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

389

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m2 þ 2s2 s
L ðsÞ ¼
s2

m

:

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Note that this exponent L is indeed increasing, with L(0) ¼ 0 and lims!1 LðsÞ ¼ 1.
Consequently, it has the main properties of an integrated baseline hazard in the MPH
model, and identification results for that model directly apply.
In particular, suppose that f(X) ¼ exp(X0 b) for some parameter vector b. Note that L is
differentiable on (0, 1) and that 0 5 lims#0 L0 (s) ¼ m 1 5 1. Thus, Ridder & Woutersen’s
(2003) identification result for the MPH model (see Section 3.2.2) implies that m, s, b, and
L are uniquely determined from LT (|X) under support conditions on the covariates X,
up to two scale normalizations.
Abbring (2007) develops this and many other results for the general case in which {Wt}
is a spectrally negative Lévy process, along the lines of the results reviewed in Section 3.
Some distinguishing features of his analysis for the MHT framework are the following.
First, defects naturally arise in the MHT framework. There may be stayers if a subpopulation entertains an infinitely high threshold and never leaves. In addition, among those with
finite thresholds, some may never move. This, for example, happens if Wt is a Brownian
motion with negative drift. The distinction between stayers and defecting movers is often
of substantial interest (Abbring 2002), and Abbring (2007) allows for both. Second, the
special structure on L facilitates sharper identification results and tighter interpretation of
these results than is possible in the MPH model. Third, in some cases, the optimal stopping
problems that underlie the MHT structure imply conditions for point identification like
Elbers & Ridder’s (1982) finite mean assumption on V. For example, in Section 4.1’s
application of Dixit’s (1989) model to unemployment durations, unbounded primitive
heterogeneity in the primitive costs of moving back into unemployment only translates
into bounded threshold heterogeneity.

4.3. Identification of the Primitives of Optimal Stopping
Section 4.2’s identification results for the MHT model can be used as input in a secondstage identification analysis of the primitives of an optimal stopping model that reduces to
the MHT model. Such a second-stage analysis needs to be tailored to the application at
hand. Here, we present an example in which agents solve Kyprianou & Surya’s (2005)
extension of Novikov & Shiryaev’s (2005) investment timing problem to the Lévy case.
 in a project that returns u0 þ Wt
Agents choose the best time to invest an amount k
when they invest at time t, where u0 is the project’s initial value and {Wt} is a Lévy process.
They discount future payoffs at a rate r > 0 and receive zero payoffs if they never invest.
Abbring (2007) notes that, with {Wt} spectrally negative, the agent will invest when {Wt}
 u0 þ LðrÞ 1 ; 0g.
first hits the threshold maxfk
 u0 and r inducing
This problem fits the MHT framework, with heterogeneity in k
threshold heterogeneity. An analysis with the MHT model determines d 1L—that is, the
distribution of dWt—and the distribution of dV, with d 2 (0, 1) an unknown scale factor.
For expositional convenience, we suppress covariates X, so that the threshold simply
equals V.
 u0 vary in the population such that k
 u0 þ LðrÞ 1 has
First, suppose that r and k
1
 u0 þ LðrÞ . Then, from the distribunonnegative support, so that the threshold V ¼ k


tion of dV, we can determine the distribution of d k
u0 þ d=LðrÞ. If r is fixed and
390

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

 u0 is identified up to scale. If r is
known, then d / L(r) is known, and the distribution of k
fixed but unknown, this distribution is only identified up to location and scale. Similarly, if
 is homogeneous and r is heterogeneous, the monotonicity of L ensures that we can
u0 k
identify the distribution of r up to the threshold’s location and scale.
In general, there may be a mass of agents who choose zero thresholds and invest
 and high discount
immediately. These are agents with high net initial project values u0 k
rates r. If the share of agents who invest immediately is observed, censored distributions of
primitives can be identified; otherwise, only truncated distributions can be determined.
One may wonder how agents end up with an investment option that yields immediate
profit in the first place. The simple investment timing model presented here treats u0 as a
free parameter and does not address this question. A two-state model such as Dixit’s (1989)
in Section 4.1 specifies both the timing of the investment of interest and the way agents end
up with the option to invest. Such a model ensures that primitive heterogeneity translates
into positive thresholds.

5. CONCLUSION
The research reviewed in this article has much enriched our understanding of the identification of dynamic discrete choice models. Important advances have been made in the identification analysis of such models with unobserved heterogeneity and state variables. Many
open questions remain; I list a select few. (a) Both Section 2.3’s discrete-time analysis and
Section 4.2’s continuous-time analysis focus on first-stage identification of decision rules and
state processes. Some exploration of primitive conditions for Section 2.3’s high-level identification assumptions, in particular, would be useful. Moreover, the second-stage identification
of economic primitives using Section 4.2’s hitting-time framework needs to be further developed, along the lines of Section 4.3. (b) Section 2.4 suggests that semiparametric identification results that do not rely on identification at infinity can be developed for specific models
with unobserved state variables. (c) Section 3 motivates the analysis of nonproportional
hazard models that are structured to better fit in with dynamic economic theory. (d) The
hitting-time framework needs be augmented with time-varying covariates in a way that is
consistent with theory. One option would be to model such covariates as noisy measurements
of the latent state, as in Section 2.4’s discrete-time models.
Dynamic discrete games, such as firm entry and exit games in industrial organization,
are an important next step in the analysis of discrete decision problems. Most research has
focused on Markov perfect equilibria in discrete-time games (see Ackerberg et al. 2007 for
a review). In such equilibria, each agent solves a dynamic program given the other players’
strategies. Consequently, much of Section 2’s identification results for single-agent dynamic
discrete choice processes in discrete time can be put to good use in the analysis of such
games (e.g., Bajari et al. 2009).
There are few results on the identification of continuous-time games. One exception is
Honoré & de Paula’s (2008) identification analysis of an optimal stopping game. They
apply Section 3’s results for hazard models to what is, essentially, a static timing game.
Recent work on the analysis of Markov perfect equilibria in truly dynamic, continuoustime games suggests that there may be substantial computational benefits from using
econometric models based on such games (Doraszelski & Judd 2005). As in the discretetime case, identification results for continuous-time single-agent models will be of use in
the identification analysis of such models.
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

391

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings
that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am very grateful to James Heckman for generously providing detailed feedback on a first
draft of this paper and to Han Hong, Hiroyuki Kasahara, Tobias Klein, Thierry Magnac,
John Rust, Katsumi Shimotsu, and Matthew Shum for their thoughtful comments.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

LITERATURE CITED
Abbring JH. 2002. Stayers versus defecting movers: a note on the identification of defective duration
models. Econ. Lett. 74:327–31
Abbring JH. 2007. Mixed hitting-time models. Discuss. Pap. 07-57/3, Tinbergen Inst., Amsterdam.
Revised August 2009
Abbring JH, Campbell JR. 2005. A firm’s first year. Discuss. Pap. 05-046/3, Tinbergen Inst., Amsterdam. Under revision
Abbring JH, Chiappori PA, Pinquet J. 2003. Moral hazard and dynamic insurance data. J. Eur. Econ.
Assoc. 1:767–820
Abbring JH, Chiappori PA, Zavadil T. 2008. Better safe than sorry? Ex ante and ex post moral hazard
in dynamic insurance data. Discuss. Pap. 2008-77, CentER, Tilburg
Abbring JH, Heckman JJ. 2007. Econometric evaluation of social programs, part III: distributional
treatment effects, dynamic treatment effects and dynamic discrete choice, and general
equilibrium policy evaluation. In Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 6B, ed. JJ Heckman,
EE Leamer, pp. 5145–303. Amsterdam: Elsevier Sci.
Abbring JH, Heckman JJ. 2008. Dynamic policy analysis. In The Econometrics of Panel Data,
ed. L Mátyás, P Sevestre, pp. 797–865. Dordrecht: Kluwer Acad. 3rd ed.
Abbring JH, Ridder G. 2009. A note on the non-parametric identification of generalized accelerated
failure-time models. Unpublished manuscript, CentER, Dep. Econom. & OR, Tilburg Univ.,
Tilburg
Ackerberg D, Benkard C, Berry S, Pakes A. 2007. Econometric tools for analyzing market outcomes.
In Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 6A, ed. JJ Heckman, EE Leamer, pp. 4171–276. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Sci.
Aguirregabiria V. 2010. Another look at the identification of dynamic discrete choice processes: an
application to retirement behavior. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 28(2):201–18
Aguirregabiria V, Mira P. 2010. Dynamic discrete choice structural models: a survey. J. Econom.
In press
Anderson T. 1954. On estimation of parameters in latent structure analysis. Psychometrika 19(1):1–10
Bajari P, Chernozhukov V, Hong H, Nekipelov D. 2009. Nonparametric and semiparametric analysis
of a dynamic discrete game. Unpublished manuscript, Dep. Econ., Univ. Minn., Minneapolis
Boyarchenko S, Levendorski S. 2007. Irreversible Decisions under Uncertainty: Optimal Stopping
Made Easy. Berlin: Springer-Verlag
Cameron S, Heckman JJ. 1998. Life cycle schooling and dynamic selection bias: models and evidence
for five cohorts of American males. J. Polit. Econ. 106:262–333
Cox DR. 1972. Regression models and life-tables (with discussion). J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B 34:187–202
Cunha F, Heckman JJ, Navarro S. 2005. Separating uncertainty from heterogeneity in life cycle
earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 57(2):191–261
392

Abbring

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Cunha F, Heckman JJ, Navarro S. 2007. The identification and economic content of ordered choice
models with stochastic thresholds. Int. Econ. Rev. 48(4):1273–309
Dixit AK. 1989. Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty. J. Polit. Econ. 97(3):620–38
Dixit AK, Pindyck RS. 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Doraszelski U, Judd KL. 2005. Avoiding the curse of dimensionality in dynamic stochastic games.
Work. Pap. 2059, Harvard Inst. Econ. Res., Cambridge, MA
Eckstein Z, Van den Berg GJ. 2007. Empirical labor search: a survey. J. Econom. 136:531–64
Eckstein Z, Wolpin KI. 1990. Estimating a market equilibrium search model from panel data on
individuals. Econometrica 58(4):783–808
Eckstein Z, Wolpin KI. 1999. Why youths drop out of high school: the impact of preferences,
opportunities, and abilities. Econometrica 67(6):1295–339
Elbers C, Ridder G. 1982. True and spurious duration dependence: the identifiability of the proportional hazard model. Rev. Econ. Stud. 64:403–9
Feller W. 1971. An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Vol. II. New York: Wiley.
2nd ed.
Flinn C, Heckman JJ. 1982. New methods for analyzing structural models of labor force dynamics.
J. Econom. 18:115–68
Friedman M. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Cambridge, MA: NBER
Heckman JJ. 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica 47:153–61
Heckman JJ. 1981. Heterogeneity and state dependence. In Studies in Labor Markets, ed. S Rosen,
pp. 91–140. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
Heckman JJ, Honoré BE. 1989. The empirical content of the Roy model. Econometrica 58:1121–49
Heckman JJ, Navarro S. 2007. Dynamic discrete choice and dynamic treatment effects. J. Econom.
136(2):341–96
Heckman JJ, Singer B. 1984a. The identifiability of the proportional hazard model. Rev. Econ. Stud.
51:231–41
Heckman JJ, Singer B. 1984b. A method for minimizing the impact of distributional assumptions in
econometric models for duration data. Econometrica 52:271–320
Heckman JJ, Singer BS. 1985. Social science duration analysis. In Longitudinal Analysis of Labor
Market Data, ed. JJ Heckman, BS Singer, pp. 39–58. Econom. Soc. Monogr. Ser. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge Univ. Press
Heckman JJ, Singer BS. 1986. Econometric analysis of longitudinal data. In Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 3, ed. Z Griliches, MD Intriligator, pp. 1690–763. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Heckman JJ, Taber C. 1994. Econometric mixture models and more general models for unobservables
in duration analysis. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 3:279–302
Honoré BE. 1993. Identification results for duration models with multiple spells. Rev. Econ. Stud.
60:241–46
Honoré BE, de Paula A. 2008. Interdependent durations. Work. Pap. 08-044, Penn Inst. Econ. Res.,
Dep. Econ., Univ. Penn.
Hotz VJ, Miller RA. 1993. Conditional choice probabilities and the estimation of dynamic models.
Rev. Econ. Stud. 60(3):497–529
Hu Y, Shum M. 2009. Nonparametric identification of dynamic models with unobserved state variables. Unpublished manuscript, Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore
Jovanovic B. 1982. Selection and the evolution of industry. Econometrica 50(3):649–70
Kasahara H, Shimotsu K. 2009. Nonparametric identification of finite mixture models of dynamic
discrete choices. Econometrica 77(1):135–75
Keane MP, Wolpin KI. 1997. The career decisions of young men. J. Polit. Econ. 105(3):473–522
Keane MP, Wolpin KI. 2009. Empirical applications of discrete choice dynamic programming models.
Rev. Econ. Dyn. 12(1):1–22
Kyprianou AE. 2006. Introductionary Lectures on Fluctuations of Lévy Processes with Applications.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag
www.annualreviews.org



Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

393

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Kyprianou AE, Surya BA. 2005. On the Novikov-Shiryaev optimal stopping problems in continuous
time. Electron. Commun. Prob. 10:146–54
Lancaster T. 1972. A stochastic model for the duration of a strike. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. A 135(2):257–71
Lancaster T. 1979. Econometric methods for the duration of unemployment. Econometrica 47:939–56
Lee M-LT, Whitmore GA. 2006. Threshold regression for survival analysis: modeling event times by a
stochastic process reaching a boundary. Stat. Sci. 21(4):501–13
Magnac T, Thesmar D. 2002. Identifying dynamic discrete choice processes. Econometrica 70:801–16
Manski CF. 1993. Dynamic choice in social settings: learning from the experiences of others.
J. Econom. 58(1–2):121–36
Matzkin RL. 1992. Nonparametric and distribution-free estimation of the binary threshold crossing
and the binary choice models. Econometrica 60(2):239–70
McDonald R, Siegel D. 1986. The value of waiting to invest. Q. J. Econ. 101(4):707–28
McFadden D. 1981. Econometric models of probabilistic choice. In Structural Analysis of Discrete
Data with Econometric Applications, ed. C Manski, D McFadden, pp. 198–272. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press
Novikov AA, Shiryaev AN. 2005. On an effective solution of the optimal stopping problem for
random walks. Theory Prob. Appl. 49(2):344–54
Olley GS, Pakes A. 1996. The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry. Econometrica 64:1263–98
Pakes A. 1986. Patents as options: some estimates of the value of holding European patent stocks.
Econometrica 54:755–84
Pakes A, Ericson R. 1998. Empirical implications of alternative models of firm dynamics. J. Econ.
Theory 79:1–45
Pakes A, Simpson M. 1989. Patent renewal data. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 1989:331–401
Ridder G. 1990. The non-parametric identification of generalized accelerated failure-time models.
Rev. Econ. Stud. 57:167–82
Ridder G, Woutersen T. 2003. The singularity of the information matrix of the mixed proportional
hazard model. Econometrica 71:1579–89
Roy A. 1951. Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 3(2):135–46
Rust J. 1987. Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: an empirical model of Harold Zurcher.
Econometrica 55:999–1033
Rust J. 1994. Structural estimation of Markov decision processes. In Handbook of Econometrics,
Vol. 4, ed. R Engle, D McFadden, pp. 3081–143. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Shimer R. 2008. The probability of finding a job. Am. Econ. Rev. 98(2):268–73
Stokey NL. 2009. The Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control Models with Fixed Costs. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Taber C. 2000. Semiparametric identification and heterogeneity in discrete choice dynamic programming models. J. Econom. 96:201–29
Van den Berg GJ. 2001. Duration models: specification, identification, and multiple durations. In
Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 5, ed. JJ Heckman, E Leamer, pp. 3381–460. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Sci.

394

Abbring

Annual Reviews
Celebrating 80 Years of Publishing Excellence

New From Annual Reviews:

EconScholar App
Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Available for iOS and Android

Economics scholars can now access highly cited, mobile-optimized review articles from a variety
of mobile devices. The EconScholar app, from Annual Reviews, allows immediate access to
full-text review articles for users with personal or institutional subscriptions to the Annual Review
of Economics, the Annual Review of Financial Economics, and the Annual Review of Resource
Economics.
Also, non-subscribers and new users can access selected complimentary articles and all abstracts,
and discover firsthand the breadth and quality of these review articles.
The app allows users to:
• read and cache full-text articles on a mobile device

• search journal content

• view high-resolution images and video

• read and share content through social
media tools

• bookmark articles (saving full-text indefinitely)

Subscribers can either enter their personal login information or connect via institutional access
to view full-text content.
To download the free EconScholar app, please visit the Apple AppStore or GooglePlay store.
For more information visit: http://www.annualreviews.org/r/econscholarpdf

Annual Reviews | Guiding Scientists to Essential Research Since 1932
Tel: 800.523.8635 (us/can) | Tel: 650.843.6647 | Fax: 650.424.0910 | Email: service@annualreviews.org

Annual Review of
Economics
Volume 2, 2010

Contents

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

Questions in Decision Theory
Itzhak Gilboa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Structural Estimation and Policy Evaluation in Developing Countries
Petra E. Todd and Kenneth I. Wolpin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Currency Unions in Prospect and Retrospect
J.M.C. Santos Silva and Silvana Tenreyro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Hypothesis Testing in Econometrics
Joseph P. Romano, Azeem M. Shaikh, and Michael Wolf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Recent Advances in the Empirics of Organizational Economics
Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Regional Trade Agreements
Caroline Freund and Emanuel Ornelas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Partial Identification in Econometrics
Elie Tamer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Intergenerational Equity
Geir B. Asheim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
The World Trade Organization: Theory and Practice
Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
How (Not) to Do Decision Theory
Eddie Dekel and Barton L. Lipman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Health, Human Capital, and Development
Hoyt Bleakley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance Markets
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Levin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
Inside Organizations: Pricing, Politics, and Path Dependence
Robert Gibbons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
vi

Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models
Jaap H. Abbring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
Microeconomics of Technological Adoption
Andrew D. Foster and Mark R. Rosenzweig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395
Heterogeneity, Selection, and Wealth Dynamics
Lawrence Blume and David Easley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 425
Social Interactions
Steven N. Durlauf and Yannis M. Ioannides. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010.2:367-394. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of St. Gallen on 03/14/13. For personal use only.

The Consumption Response to Income Changes
Tullio Jappelli and Luigi Pistaferri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 479
Financial Structure and Economic Welfare: Applied
General Equilibrium Development Economics
Robert Townsend. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507
Models of Growth and Firm Heterogeneity
Erzo G.J. Luttmer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 547
Labor Market Models of Worker and Firm Heterogeneity
Rasmus Lentz and Dale T. Mortensen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 577
The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the
Financial Crisis of 2007–2009
Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 603
Competition and Productivity: A Review of Evidence
Thomas J. Holmes and James A. Schmitz, Jr. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 619
Persuasion: Empirical Evidence
Stefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
Commitment Devices
Gharad Bryan, Dean Karlan, and Scott Nelson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 671
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Economics
articles may be found at http://econ.annualreviews.org

Contents

vii

