Jaap H. Abbring

Pierre-André Chiappori

Free University

University of Chicago

James J. Heckman

Jean Pinquet

University of Chicago

Université Paris X-Nanterre

Abstract
A standard problem of applied contracts theory is to empirically distinguish between adverse
selection and moral hazard. We show that dynamic insurance data allow to distinguish moral
hazard from dynamic selection on unobservables. In the presence of moral hazard, experience
rating implies negative occurrence dependence: individual claim intensities decrease with the
number of past claims. We discuss econometric tests for the various types of data that are
typically available. Finally, we argue that dynamic data also allow to test for adverse
selection, even if it is based on asymmetric learning. (JEL: D82, G22, C41, C14)

1. Introduction
For two decades, contract theory has remained a predominantly theoretical field.
However, a number of papers have recently been devoted to empirical applications of the theory.1 It has been argued that insurance offers a particularly
promising field for empirical work on contracts. Individual (automobile, housing, health, life, etc.) insurance contracts are largely standardized. Researchers
have access to databases of insurance companies, which typically contain
several millions of such contracts. The information in these databases can
generally be summarized in a reasonably small number of quantitative and
qualitative indicators. The ‘outcome’ of the contract— be it the occurrence of an
accident, its cost, or some level of expenditure—is very precisely recorded in
the firms’ files, together with a detailed history of the contractual relationship
(changes in coverage, etc.). Not surprisingly, several recent papers are aimed at
Acknowledgments: Support from the NSF (grant #0096516) is gratefully acknowledged. This
paper was written while Jaap Abbring was visiting the Department of Economics of University
College London. Abbring’s research is supported by a fellowship of the Royal Netherlands
Academy of Arts and Sciences.
E-mail addresses: Abbring: jabbring@econ.vu.nl; Chiappori: pchiappo@midway.uchicago.edu;
Heckman: jheckman@midway.uchicago.edu; Pinquet: pinquet@u-paris10.fr
1. See Chiappori and Salanié (2003) for a recent survey.

© 2003 by the European Economic Association

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

ADVERSE SELECTION AND MORAL
HAZARD IN INSURANCE: CAN DYNAMIC
DATA HELP TO DISTINGUISH?

Abbring et al.

Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in Insurance

513

2. Pueltz and Snow (1994), Dionne and Vanasse (1992), Chiappori and Salanié (1997, 2000),
Dionne, Gouriéroux, and Vanasse (1997), Richaudeau (1999) and Dionne et al. (2001), to name
only a few, analyze automobile insurance contracts, while Holly et al. (1998), Chiappori, Durand,
and Geoffard (1998), Chiappori, Geoffard, and Kyriadizou (1998), Cardon and Hendel (1998) and
Hendel and Lizzeri (1999) use health or life insurance data, and Poterba and Finkelstein (2003)
consider annuity contracts.
3. For a review of various attempts to distinguish between moral hazard and adverse selection,
see Chiappori (2000).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

testing for the existence and estimating the magnitude of asymmetric information effects in competitive insurance markets.2
A popular strategy for studying asymmetric information is to test, conditional on observables, for a correlation between the choice of a contract and the
occurrence or severity of an accident. Under adverse selection on risk, ‘highrisk’ agents are, everything else equal, both more likely to choose a contract
with more complete coverage and more likely to have an accident. The basic
moral hazard story is very close to the adverse selection one, except for an
inverted causality. In a moral hazard context, agents first choose different
contracts. Then, an agent facing better coverage and, therefore, weaker incentives will be less cautious and have more accidents. In both cases, the same
pattern emerges: controlling for observables, more comprehensive coverage
should be associated with higher realized risk—a property that can be tested
using appropriate parametric or non-parametric techniques.
The conditional correlation approach has several advantages. It is simple
and very robust, as argued by Chiappori et al. (2002). Furthermore, it can be
used on static, cross-sectional data that are relatively easy to obtain. However,
these qualities come at a cost. The past history of the relationship influences
both the current contract (through experience rating) and the agent’s behavior,
and this effect is hard to take into account with cross-sectional data. More
importantly, the correlation is not informative on the direction of the causality,
which makes the two stories (moral hazard and adverse selection) very hard to
distinguish. Still, such a distinction is crucial, if only because the optimal form
of regulation of insurance markets varies considerably with the context.3
The research program summarized in the present paper relies on the insight
that the dynamic aspects of the relationship can help distinguishing between
adverse selection and moral hazard. Two approaches can be distinguished. First,
the form of optimal dynamic contracts differs considerably between the two
cases. Thus, the qualitative properties of observed contracts may provide useful
insights into the type of problem they are designed to address. The research
program described in this paper concentrates on a second approach, in which the
(possibly suboptimal) contracts are taken as given and we concentrate on their
implications for observed behavior. In particular, most ‘real life’ insurance
contracts exhibit some form of experience rating. A typical property of experience rating schemes is that the occurrence of an accident shifts the entire
incentive scheme the agent is facing. Under moral hazard, this results in a form

514

Journal of the European Economic Association

April–May 2003 1(2–3):512–521

2. Dynamic Moral Hazard Under Experience Rating: Theory
The model is directly borrowed from Chiappori and Heckman (2000) and
Abbring et al. (forthcoming). We consider a dynamic version of an insurance
model à la Mossin (1968). Time is discrete. In each period t, the agent receives
an income normalized to one and may with some probability (1 ⫺ pt) incur a
fixed monetary loss L. She is covered by an insurance contract involving a fixed
deductible D and a premium Qt that depends on past experience. Specifically,
the evolution of Qt is governed by the following ‘bonus-malus’ system:
Q t⫹1 ⫽ ␦ Q t if no accident occurred in period t
⫽ ␥ Q t if an accident occurred in period t
where ␦ ⬍ 1 ⬍ ␥.
The no-accident probability pt is subject to moral hazard. Specifically, in
each period t the agent chooses an effort level et ⱖ 0, resulting in a no accident
probability pt ⫽ p(et) for some increasing, concave function p. The cost of effort
is assumed separable, i.e., the agent attaches utility
4

u共 x兲 ⫺ e
to income x if he exerts effort e, where u is increasing and strictly concave. The
horizon is infinite and agents maximize expected discounted utility.
According to the bonus-malus scheme, each accident shifts the incentive
scheme faced by the agent upward, thus modifying her incentives. It follows that
the ‘cost’ of an accident, in terms of higher future premia, depends on random
events (the sequence of future accidents) and endogenous decisions (the se4. Proportional bonus-malus schemes of this type are empirically frequent. The French system,
which is relevant for our empirical application, corresponds to ␦ ⫽ .95 and ␥ ⫽ 1.25. In addition,
the French system imposes a floor and a ceiling on ␪t, respectively equal to .5 and 3.5. In our
discussion of the French system, we ignore the fact that accidents occur continuously but premiums
are only updated annually. See Abbring et al. (forthcoming) for a formal discussion.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

of autocorrelation in the accident process. Thus, an empirical analysis of this
process can be informative on the presence of moral hazard.
In addition, dynamic data allow to address the problem of asymmetric
learning. Conventional wisdom suggests that, in many cases, asymmetric information may not be present at the beginning of the relationship (e.g., the relative
quality of a young driver is unknown to her and her insurer). Rather, it emerges
gradually as a consequence of different learning processes (say, the young driver
learns from near misses that are not even observed by the insurer). Then the
contractual changes that take place during the relationship may be informative
about the agent’s riskiness, even if the initial choice of a contract is uncorrelated
with residual risk (as found by most studies).

Abbring et al.

Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in Insurance

515

The accident process exhibits negative occurrence dependence, in the sense
that individual claim intensities decrease with the number of past claims.
This suggests that we can test for moral hazard by simply testing for
negative occurrence dependence in the raw data. One should however be careful
at this point. While moral hazard implies occurrence dependence effects at the
individual level, individual claim intensities also vary with observed characteristics (such as age, driving experience, region, etc.) and, more importantly, with
unobserved individual heterogeneity factors. In automobile insurance, for example, existing work strongly suggests that unobserved heterogeneity is paramount. It is well known that unobserved heterogeneity results in (spurious)
positive occurrence dependence in the data. The intuition is that those individuals whose risk is persistently high for unobserved external reasons will be more
likely to have had accidents in the past and to have accidents in the future (in
other words, to the extent that ‘bad’ drivers remain bad for at least a while, we
should expect to find a positive correlation between past and future accident
rates). Of course, this effect, which is overwhelmingly confirmed by the data,
does not contradict the theoretical analysis sketched above: whatever the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity, it is still true that under moral hazard, the
accident probability of each individual decreases with the person’s number of
past claims. But any empirical investigation of this property must address the
problem of disentangling the ‘true,’ negative dependence induced by the dynamics of incentives from the ‘spurious,’ positive contagion generated by
unobserved heterogeneity.
5. An additional (and standard) difficulty comes from the fact that we observe claims, not
accidents, and that the decision to file a claim is endogenous. See Chiappori and Salanié (1997) for
a precise discussion of this problem.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

quence of future efforts). Technically, the agent must solve a stochastic control
problem. Here, we simply summarize the main properties of the solution; the
reader is referred to Abbring et al. (forthcoming) for a precise analysis. A first
result is that past experience matters for the current decision only through the
current level of the premium; i.e., Qt is the only state variable of the control
problem. Secondly, the optimal effort is increasing in the premium, at least
when both the premium and the deductible are small relative to the agent’s
income. It follows that the accident probability process of any given agent will
exhibit a negative occurrence-dependence property. In the absence of an accident, the premium— hence, by our result, the agent’s incentives— decreases.
Effort is optimally reduced, resulting in a steady increase of the accident
probability. However, the occurrence of an accident generates a discrete jump in
the premium, which boosts incentives and ultimately results in a drop in the
accident probability. The main testable implication of the model is thus the
following:5

516

Journal of the European Economic Association

April–May 2003 1(2–3):512–521

3. Testing for Moral Hazard
In most empirical studies in insurance, data are drawn from the files of one (or
more) insurance companies. Many relevant characteristics of the driver (age,
gender, place of residence, seniority, type of job) and the car (brand, model,
vintage, power) are used by companies for pricing purposes. All these are
available to the econometrician as well. The same is true for the characteristics
of the contract (type of coverage, premium, deductible, . . .). Finally, each
accident— or more precisely each claim—is recorded with all the relevant
background information.
The main differences between data sets can be traced back to the way past
history is recorded. Existing situations can be gathered in three broad cases:
• In the most favorable situation, the exact date of each accident is recorded.
Then the occurrence of an accident can be modelled in continuous time,
using event-history models.
• Many experience-rating schemes can be implemented with information on
the number of accidents in each contract year only. In such cases,
insurance companies will often only provide researchers with individual
counts of claims over the years. In some cases, information on whether at
least one accident has occurred or not in any year (rather than the exact
number of accidents in each year) is sufficient. Then, for each agent we
only observe a sequence of 0s (for years without accidents) and 1s (years
with accidents).
• Finally, the minimum information that is needed to implement a bonusmalus scheme may be even poorer. If all past accidents are treated
symmetrically whatever their exact timing (as in our theoretical model), the
computation of a bonus-malus coefficient only requires information on the
total number of past accidents. In our model, an agent who has been
driving for t periods and has had n accidents will be charged a premium of
␥n␦t⫺n times her initial premium, whatever the exact timing of each of the
accidents. In this case, a single draw from an insurance company’s files
may only give a cross-section of total counts of accidents for a group of
clients that has been driving for periods of varying length. Dynamics can
only be studied by comparing across individuals of different (driving)
seniority.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

This problem is a manifestation of a general question, namely distinguishing heterogeneity and state dependence. This issue has been abundantly discussed in the labor literature since the seminal contribution of Heckman and
Borjas (1980). An interesting side aspect of our research, thus, is that it
establishes a link between an existing literature in labor economics and questions that arose recently in applications of contract theory.

Abbring et al.

Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in Insurance

517

3.1 Heterogeneity Versus Moral Hazard in Continuous-Time
Event-History Data
In the first case, the essence of the test is clear. Under moral hazard, the hazard
rate of an accident, conditional on observable and unobservable heterogeneity,
should be steadily increasing throughout any period without an accident and
drop discontinuously whenever an accident occurs. Under the null, however, the
hazard rate should not change after an accident. This can either be tested
parametrically or non-parametrically. Denote the number of claims up to and
including time t by N(t) and let X(t) be some vector of observable covariates
(age, gender, etc.) at time t. Abbring et al. (forthcoming) assume that the
intensity ␪ of claims, conditional of the claim history {N(u); 0 ⱕ u ⬍ t} and the
covariate history {X(u); 0 ⱕ u ⱕ t} up to time t takes the form

␪ 共t兩 ␭ , 兵N共u兲; 0 ⱕ u ⬍ t其, 兵X共u兲; 0 ⱕ u ⱕ t其兲 ⫽ ␭␤ N共t⫺兲␺共t兲eX共t兲⬘␥,
where ␺ is a fully nonparametric baseline hazard function, ␤ ⬎ 0 a scalar
parameter, ␭ a nonnegative unobservable covariate reflecting unobserved heterogeneity, and ␥ a vector of parameters. Note that N(t⫺) is the number of
claims up to, but not including, time t. Thus, the parameter ␤ ⬎ 0 captures true
occurrence dependence effects. In the bonus-malus system described above,
moral hazard leads to a decline in the intensity of claims with the number of
previous claims (␤ ⬍ 1). Without moral hazard, we expect ␤ ⫽ 1. Distinguishing these cases (testing), and estimating ␤, is the focus of the empirical analysis.
Statistical tests are developed and applied to a French sample of 79,684
contracts, of which 4,831 have one claim in the contract year and 287 have two
claims or more. The null (␤ ⫽ 1) cannot be rejected at any conventional level,
suggesting that moral hazard is not a major problem in the data under consideration.

3.2 Testing for Moral Hazard from Sequences of Accident Counts
When only the total numbers of accidents by year are known, we can develop
and apply similar methods for testing occurrence dependence in panel count
data. Here, we focus on the more challenging case in which we only observe an
annual sequence of 0s and 1s, corresponding to respectively years without and

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

In each of these three cases, the dynamics of accidents can be used to test
for the presence of moral hazard, against the null that the accident probability
does not depend on the agent’s incentives and only evolves according to some
predetermined law (possibly depending on observables, such as age of the
driver, age of the car, and others).

518

Journal of the European Economic Association

April–May 2003 1(2–3):512–521

3.3 Testing for Moral Hazard from Total Number of Accidents Only
Even in the case in which information is minimal—i.e., in which only the total
number of past accidents is known for each agent in the insurer’s database—it
is still possible to test for moral hazard. In this case, we essentially have a
cross-section of total accident counts over the periods that agents have been
driving (seniority). Under additional stationarity assumptions, one can exploit
the variation in seniority in the data set to test for moral hazard. Specifically,
assume that (a) individual accident probabilities are constant over time, and (b)
the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity in the population is identical across
cohorts (seniority levels). That is, conditionally on observables, the no accident
probability p is distributed among the drivers of any given seniority according
to some distribution ␮ that is identical across seniorities. The idea of the test, as
developed by Chiappori and Heckman (2000), is the following. Under the null
of no moral hazard, for any driver with seniority t and no accident probability
6.

In the duration model, this would correspond to a constant ␺.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

years with at least one accident, for each agent. Econometric procedures for
testing for occurrence dependence on such data have been developed by Heckman (1978, 1981a, 1981b), Honoré (1993), Kyriazidou (1997), and Honoré and
Kyriazidou (2000). They rely on the assumption that each agent’s accident
probability remains constant throughout the observation period (stationarity).6
To get the intuition in a simple way, assume the system is malus only (i.e., the
premium increases after each accident, but does not decrease subsequently), and
consider two sequences of 4 years, A ⫽ (1, 0, 0, 0) and B ⫽ (0, 0, 0, 1), where
a 1 (resp. 0) denotes the occurrence of an accident (resp. no accident) during the
corresponding year. In the absence of moral hazard, and assuming away learning phenomena, the probabilities of observing either of the two sequences
should be exactly the same; in both cases, the observed accident frequency is 25
percent. Under moral hazard, however, the first sequence is more probable than
the second: in A, the sequence of three years without accidents happens after an
accident, hence when the premium, and consequently the marginal cost of future
accidents and the incentives to take care are maximum. In other words, for a
given average frequency of accidents, the timing of the occurrences can provide
valuable information on the importance of incentives.
The test described here assumes stationarity. The analogy with the methods
for continuous-time data of Abbring et al. (forthcoming) discussed earlier
suggests that tests can be developed that are informative on moral hazard even
if individual accident probabilities may change over time for external reasons.
Richer panel-count data, that do not only record whether an accident has
occurred at all but also how many accidents have occurred in any year, may be
helpful here. This is on our research agenda.

Abbring et al.

Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in Insurance

519

mt ⫽

冕

p t d ␮ 共 p兲,

i.e., to the t-th moment of the distribution. It follows that the numbers m1,
m2, . . . must, under the null, be the successive moments of the same distribution, which generates a first set of restrictions (see Heckman 1978 and in a
different context Chiappori 1985). In addition, one can see that again under the
null, the proportion, within the subpopulation of seniority t, of agents with
exactly one accident is
m 1t ⫽

冕

tp t⫺1共1 ⫺ p兲d␮共 p兲

⫽ t共m t⫺1 ⫺ mt兲.
This provides a set of simple, linear restrictions involving three statistics,
namely mt⫺1, mt and m1t . Additional restrictions can be derived involving higher
numbers of accidents. An analogous analysis for the moral hazard case is
required to judge the power of tests based on these restrictions. These are topics
for future research. Note that, in any case, these tests involve a comparison of
disjoint subpopulations and heavily exploit stationarity assumptions.

3.4 Testing for Adverse Selection
In the three cases considered, the null (no moral hazard) is consistent with the
presence of unobserved heterogeneity, whatever its type. Such heterogeneity
reflects the impact of any variable that is not observed by the insurance company
(and therefore the researcher), whether it is known by the insuree or not. In other
words, one does not, under the null, distinguish between adverse selection and
symmetrically imperfect information. Testing for adverse selection (and particularly asymmetric learning) requires analyzing the joint process followed by
accidents and contractual choices.
In a dynamic setting, adverse selection can be modelled in various ways.
One way is to assume that each agent is characterized by some constant
parameter reflecting her ‘quality’ as a driver, which is known by the agent but
not by the insurer at the beginning of the relationship. In this setting, adverse
selection can be tested using the simple, cross-sectional approach described in
the introduction. In the case of automobile insurance, most existing analyses fail
to find positive conditional correlation, at least on populations of young drivers.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

p, the probability of having no accident throughout the observation period is pt.
Hence the proportion of drivers with no accident throughout the period is, under
the null, equal to

520

Journal of the European Economic Association

April–May 2003 1(2–3):512–521

References
Abbring, J. H., P. A. Chiappori, and J. Pinquet (forthcoming). “Moral Hazard and Dynamic
Insurance Data,” Journal of the European Economic Association.
Cardon, J. and I. Hendel (1998). “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence
From the National Health Expenditure Survey,” mimeo. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University.
Chiappori, P. A. (1985). “Distribution of Income and the Law of Demand,” Econometrica,
53, pp. 109 –127.
Chiappori, P. A. (2000). “Econometric Models of Insurance under Asymmetric Information,”
In Handbook of Insurance, edited by G. Dionne. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Chiappori, P. A., F. Durand, and P. Y. Geoffard (1998). “Moral Hazard and the Demand for
Physician Services: First Lessons from a French Natural Experiment.” European Economic Review, 42, pp. 499 –511.
Chiappori, P. A., P. Y. Geoffard, and E. Kyriadizou (1998). “Cost of Time, Moral Hazard,
and the Demand for Physician Services,” mimeo. University of Chicago.
Chiappori, P. A. and J. Heckman (2000). “Testing for Moral Hazard on Dynamic Insurance
Data: Theory and Econometric Tests,” mimeo. University of Chicago.
Chiappori, P. A., B. Jullien, B. Salanié, and F. Salanié (2002). “Asymmetric Information in
Insurance: Some Testable Implications,” mimeo. University of Chicago.
Chiappori, P. A. and B. Salanié (1997). “Empirical Contract Theory: The Case of Insurance
Data,” European Economic Review, 41, pp. 943–951.
Chiappori, P. A. and B. Salanié (2000). “Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 108, pp. 56 –78.
Chiappori, P. A. and B. Salanié (2003). “Testing Contract Theory: A Survey of Some Recent
Work,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Application, Eighth
World Congress, M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen, and P. Turnovsky, eds. Econometric Society
Monographs, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 115–149.
Dionne, G., C. Gouriéroux, and C. Vanasse (1997). “The Informational Content of Household
Decisions, With an Application to Insurance under Adverse Selection.” Working Paper,
HEC, Montreal.
Dionne, G., M. Maurice, J. Pinquet, and C. Vanasse (2001). “The Role of Memory in
Long-Term Contracting with Moral Hazard: Empirical Evidence in Automobile Insurance,” mimeo., University of Montreal.
Dionne, G. and C. Vanasse (1992). “Automobile Insurance Ratemaking in the Presence of
Asymmetrical Information.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 7, pp. 149 –165.
Heckman, J. J. (1978). “Simple Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data Developed and

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

This suggests that adverse selection, if any, is not adequately described by the
‘fixed quality parameter’ story.
A more complex but also more convincing version relies on the asymmetric
learning argument sketched in the introduction. There, adverse selection gradually emerges during the relationship. A natural empirical strategy is to study
the causal relationship between the sequences of accidents and contract choices
(or amendments). In particular, agents who learn their risk is above average are
more likely to switch to a contract entailing a more comprehensive coverage.
The previous (heterogeneity versus occurrence-dependence) perspective must
then be extended to a two-dimensional process. Again, this will be the topic of
future work.

Abbring et al.

Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in Insurance

521

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-abstract/1/2-3/512/2281480 by Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam user on 21 February 2019

Applied to Test the Hypothesis of True State Dependence Against the Hypothesis of
Spurious State Dependence.” Annales de l’INSEE, 30 –31, pp. 227–269.
Heckman, J. J. (1981a). “Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data,” in Structural Analysis
of Discrete Panel Data with Econometric Applications, edited by C. Manski and D.
McFadden. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Heckman, J. J. (1981b). “Heterogeneity and State Dependence,” in Studies of Labor Markets,
edited by S. Rosen. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J. and G. J. Borjas (1980). “Does Unemployment Cause Future Unemployment?
Definitions, Questions and Answers from a Continuous Time Model of Heterogeneity and
State Dependence.” Economica, 47, pp. 247–283.
Hendel, I. and A. Lizzeri (1999). “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts: Evidence
from Life Insurance,” working paper, Princeton University.
Holly, A., L. Gardiol, G. Domenighetti, and B. Bisig (1998). “An Econometric Model of
Health Care Utilization and Health Insurance in Switzerland.” European Economic
Review, 42, pp. 513–522.
Honoré, B. (1993). “Orthogonality Conditions for Tobit Models with Fixed Effects and
Lagged Dependant Variables,” Journal of Econometrics, 59, pp. 35– 61.
Honoré, B. and E. Kyriazidou (2000). “Panel Data Discrete Choice Models with Lagged
Dependent Variables,” Econometrica, 68, pp. 839 – 874.
Kyriazidou, E. (1997). “Estimation of Panel Data Sample Selection Models,” Econometrica,
65, pp. 1335–1364.
Mossin, J. (1968). “Aspects of Rational Insurance Purchasing,” Journal of Political Economy,
76, pp. 553–568.
Poterba, J. and A. Finkelstein (2003). “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder
Evidence From the U.K. Annuity Market,” mimeo., MIT.
Puelz, R. and A. Snow (1994). “Evidence on Adverse Selection: Equilibrium Signalling and
Cross-Subsidization in the Insurance Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, pp.
236 –257.
Richaudeau, D. (1999). “Automobile Insurance Contracts and Risk of Accident: An Empirical Test Using French Individual Data.” The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance
Theory, 24, pp. 97–114.

