THE EVENT-HISTORY APPROACH
TO PROGRAM EVALUATION$
Jaap H. Abbring
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the event-history approach to microeconometric
program evaluation. We present a mixed semi-Markov event-history
model, discuss its application to program evaluation, and analyze its
empirical content. The results of this paper provide fundamental insights
into what can be learned from longitudinal microdata about, for example,
the effects of training programs for the unemployed on their unemployment durations and subsequent job stability. They can guide the choice of
particular models and methods for the empirical analysis of such effects.

1. INTRODUCTION
Event-history methods are an important tool for the microeconometric
evaluation of dynamic programs using longitudinal data. For example, the
effects of training and counseling on unemployment durations and job
stability have been analyzed by applying event-history methods to data on

$

Revised version of ‘‘The Non-Parametric Identiﬁcation of Mixed Semi-Markov EventHistory Models’’ (July 2000).

Modelling and Evaluating Treatment Effects in Econometrics
Advances in Econometrics, Volume 21, 33–55
Copyright r 2008 by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
ISSN: 0731-9053/doi:10.1016/S0731-9053(07)00002-3

33

34

JAAP H. ABBRING

individual labor-market and training histories (Ridder, 1986; Card &
Sullivan, 1988; Gritz, 1993; Ham & LaLonde, 1996; Eberwein, Ham, &
LaLonde, 1997; Bonnal, Fougère, & Sérandon, 1997). Similarly, the moral
hazard effects of unemployment insurance have been studied by analyzing
the effects of time-varying beneﬁts on labor-market transitions (e.g., Meyer,
1990; Abbring, Van den Berg, & Van Ours, 2005; Van den Berg, Van der
Klaauw, & Van Ours, 2004). In ﬁelds like epidemiology, the use of eventhistory models to analyze treatment effects is widespread (see, e.g., Andersen,
Borgan, Gill, & Keiding, 1993; Keiding, 1999).
In this chapter, we study the event-history approach to program
evaluation.1 We present a mixed semi-Markov event-history model. We
discuss its applications to program evaluation and develop some novel
identiﬁcation results.
The event-history approach to program evaluation is ﬁrmly rooted in the
econometric literature on state dependence and heterogeneity (Heckman &
Borjas, 1980; Heckman, 1981a). In the tradition of the selection-model
literature, event-history models along the lines of Heckman and Singer
(1984a, 1986) are used to jointly model transitions into programs and
transitions into outcome states. Causal effects of programs are modeled as
the dependence of individual transition rates on the individual history of
program participation. Dynamic selection effects are modeled by allowing
for dependent unobserved heterogeneity in both the program and outcome
transition rates.
Without restrictions on the class of models considered, true state
dependence and dynamic selection effects cannot be distinguished. Any
history dependence of current transition rates can be explained both as
true state dependence and as the result of unobserved heterogeneity that
simultaneously affects the history and current transitions. This is a dynamic
manifestation of the problem of causal inference from observational data.
It is the fundamental problem of distinguishing state dependence and
heterogeneity.
In applied work, researchers avoid this problem by imposing additional
structure. One example is a mixed semi-Markov model in which the causal
effects are restricted to the effects of program participation in the previous
spell (e.g., Bonnal et al., 1997). There is a substantial literature that studies
the structure needed to enable the identiﬁcation of state dependence and
heterogeneity in duration and event-history models from longitudinal
microdata (see Heckman & Taber, 1994; Van den Berg, 2001, for reviews).
However, little is known about the identiﬁability of general event-history
models. The existing literature restricts attention to either single-spell

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

35

two-state models (e.g., Elbers & Ridder, 1982; Heckman & Singer, 1984b;
Ridder, 1990; Kortram, Lenstra, Ridder, & Van Rooij, 1995; Abbring, 2002,
2007), multispell two-state models (Honoré, 1993), or competing-risks
models (Heckman & Honoré, 1989; Abbring & Van den Berg, 2003a).
Neither of these models handles the effect of a dynamically assigned
treatment, like a training program, on event-history outcomes such as
unemployment durations.
Abbring and Van den Berg (2003b) develop results for a structural
bivariate duration model of the effect of a single treatment time on an
outcome duration. Their model can be rewritten as a particular three-states
event-history model with state dependence (see Section 2). In this chapter,
we discuss more general event-history models. We will focus on mixed semiMarkov models, which allow for dynamic selection and various forms of
state dependence, including duration dependence and dependence on the
previous state occupied (‘‘lagged occurrence dependence’’).
The chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the mixed semiMarkov event-history model and discusses its relation to models that have
been used in empirical work. Section 3 discusses the model’s identiﬁability
from a random sample of censored event histories. Section 4 discusses
alternative sampling schemes. Section 5 concludes with some remarks on the
implications for applied empirical work.

2. A MIXED SEMI-MARKOV
EVENT-HISTORY MODEL
2.1. Model
The model is set up along the lines of Heckman and Singer (1984a, 1986).
Point of departure is a continuous-time stochastic process assuming values in a
ﬁnite set S at each point in time. We will interpret realizations of this process
as agents’ event histories of transitions between states in the state space S.
Suppose that event histories start at real-valued random times T0 in an
S-valued random state S0, and that subsequent transitions occur at random
times T1, T2, y such that T 0 oT 1 oT 2 o   . Let Sl be the random
destination state of the transition at Tl. Taking the sample paths of the
event-history process to be right-continuous, we have that Sl is the state
occupied in the interval [Tl,Tl+1).
Suppose that heterogeneity between agents is captured by vectors of timeconstant observed covariates X and unobserved covariates V.2 Then, state

36

JAAP H. ABBRING

dependence in the event-history process for given individual characteristics
X,V has a causal interpretation.3 We structure such state dependence by
assuming that the event-history process conditional on X,V is a timehomogeneous semi-Markov process: Conditional on X,V, the length of a
spell in a state and the destination state of the transition ending that spell
depend only on the past through the current state. In our notation,
(DT l ; Sl Þ@fðT i ; S i Þ; i ¼ 0; . . . ; l  1gjS l1 ; X ; V ; where DTl : ¼ Tl  Tl1 is
the length of spell l. Also, the distribution of (DT l ; S l ÞjS l1 ; X ; V does
not depend on l. Note that, conditional on X,V, {Sl, lZ0} is a timehomogeneous Markov chain under these assumptions.
Nontrivial dynamic selection effects arise because V is not observed. The
event-history process conditional only on observed covariates X is a mixed
semi-Markov process. If V affects the initial state S0, or transitions from
there, subpopulations of agents in different states at some time t typically
have different distributions of the unobserved characteristics V. Therefore,
a comparison of the subsequent transitions in two such subpopulations does
not only reﬂect state dependence, but also sorting of agents with different
unobserved characteristics into the different states they occupy at time t.
We model {(DTl,Sl), lZ1}|T0,S0,X,V as a repeated competing-risks
model. Due to the mixed semi-Markov assumption, the latent durations
corresponding to transitions into the possible destination states in the lth
spell only depend on the past through the current state Sl1, conditional on
X,V. This implies that we can fully specify the repeated competing-risks
model by specifying a set of origin-destination-speciﬁc latent durations, with
corresponding transition rates. Let T ljk denote the latent duration
corresponding to the transition from state j to state k in spell l. We
explicitly allow for the possibility that transitions between certain (ordered)
pairs of states may be impossible. To this end, deﬁne the correspondence
Z : S ! PðSÞ assigning to each s 2 S the set of all destination states to
which transitions are made from s with positive probability.4 Here, PðSÞ is
the set of all subsets of S (the ‘‘power set’’ of S). Then, the length of spell l
is given by DT l ¼ mins2ZðSl1 Þ T lSl1 s , and the destination state by
S l ¼ arg mins2ZðSl1 Þ T lSl1 s .
We take the latent durations to be mutually independent, jointly
independent from T0,S0, and identically distributed across spells l, all conditional on X,V. This reﬂects both the mixed semi-Markov assumption and
the additional assumption that all dependence between the latent durations
corresponding to the competing risks in a given spell l is captured by the
observed regressors X and the unobservables V. This is a standard
assumption in econometric duration analysis, which, with the semi-Markov

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

37

assumption, allows us to characterize the distribution of {(DTl,Sl),lZ1}|
T0,S0,X,V by specifying origin-destination-speciﬁc hazards yjk(t|X,V) for the
marginal distributions of T ljk jX ;V .
We assume that the hazards yjk(t|X,V) are of the mixed proportional
hazard (MPH) type:5

ljk ðtÞfjk ðX ÞV jk if k 2 ZðjÞ
(1)
yjk ðtjX ; V Þ ¼
0
otherwise
The baseline hazards ljk : Rþ ! ð0; 1Þ capture duration Rdependence of the
t
individual transition rates. They have integrals Ljk ðtÞ :¼ 0 ljk ðtÞdto1 for
all t 2 Rþ . The regressor functions fjk : X ! ð0; 1Þ are assumed to be
continuous, with X  Rq being the support of X. In applications, these
functions are frequently speciﬁed as fjk(x)=exp(xubjk) for some parameter
vector bjk. We will not make such parametric assumptions. Note that the
fact that all regressor functions are deﬁned on the same domain X is not
restrictive, because each function fjk can ‘‘select’’ certain elements of X by
being trivial functions of the other elements. In the parametric example, the
vector bjk would only have nonzero elements for those regressors that matter
to the transition from j to k. Finally, the (0,N)-valued random variable Vjk
is the scalar component of V that affects the transition from state j to state k.
Note that we allow for general dependence between the components of V.
This way, we can capture, for example, that agents with lower reemployment rates have higher training enrollment rates. We normalize
Ljk ðt Þ ¼ 1

and

fjk ðx Þ ¼ 1;

j 2 S;

k 2 ZðjÞ

for some a priori chosen tA(0,N) and x 2 X. These normalizations are
innocuous, because Vjk can capture the scale of yjk.
This fully characterizes the distribution of the transitions {(DTl,Sl), lZ1}
conditional on the initial conditions T0,S0 and the agents’ characteristics
X,V. A complete model of the event histories {(Tl,Sl), lZ0} conditional on
X,V would, in addition, require a speciﬁcation of the initial conditions T0,S0
for given X,V. It is important to stress here that T0,S0 are the initial
conditions of the event-history process itself, and should not be confused
with the initial conditions in a particular sample (which we will discuss in
Section 4). In empirical work, interest in the dependence between start times
T0 and characteristics X,V is often limited to the observation that the
distribution of agents’ characteristics may vary over cohorts indexed by T0.
The choice of initial state S0 may, in general, be of some interest, but is often
trivial. For example, we could model labor-market histories from the

38

JAAP H. ABBRING

calendar time T0 at which agents turn 15 onwards. In an economy with
perfect compliance to a mandatory schooling age over 15, the initial state S0
would be ‘‘(mandatory) schooling’’ for all. Therefore, we will not consider
a model of the event-history’s initial conditions, but instead focus on the
conditional model of subsequent transition histories.
Because of the semi-Markov assumption, the distribution of {(DTl,Sl),
lZ1}|T0,S0,X,V only depends on S0, and not T0. Thus, T0 only affects
observed event histories through cohort effects on the distribution of
unobserved characteristics V. The initial state S0, however, may both
have causal effects on subsequent transitions and be informative on the
distribution of V. For expositional clarity, we assume that the distribution
of unobserved covariates does not vary over cohorts, or more precisely that
V@T0|S0,X, throughout the chapter.6
An econometric model for transition histories conditional on the observed
covariates X can be derived from the model of {(DTl,Sl), lZ1}|S0,X,V by
aggregating over V. The exact way this should be done depends on the
sampling scheme used. First, in Section 3, we consider sampling from the
population of event histories. We assume that we observe the covariates X,
the initial state S0, and the ﬁrst L transitions from there. Then, we can model
these transitions for given S0,X by integrating the conditional model over
the distribution of V|S0,X.
Next, in Section 4, we brieﬂy discuss more complex, and arguably more
realistic, sampling schemes. For example, when studying labor-market
histories we may randomly sample from the stock of unemployed at a
particular point in time. Because the unobserved factor V affects the
probability of being unemployed at the sampling date, the distribution of
V|X in the stock sample does not equal its population distribution.
Moreover, in this case we typically do not observe an agent’s entire labormarket history from T0 onwards. Instead, we may have data on the time
spent in unemployment at the sampling date and on labor-market
transitions for some period after the sampling date. This ‘‘initial-conditions
problem’’ complicates matters further (Heckman, 1981b).

2.2. Applications to Program Evaluation
Several empirical papers study the effect of a single treatment on
some outcome duration or set of transitions. Two approaches can be
distinguished. In the ﬁrst approach, the outcome and treatment processes
are explicitly and separately speciﬁed. The second approach distinguishes

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

39

treatment as a separate state in a single event-history model with state
dependence.
The ﬁrst approach is used in a variety of papers in labor economics.
Eberwein et al. (1997) specify a model for labor-market transitions in which
the transition intensities between various labor-market states (not including
treatment) depend on whether someone has been assigned to a training
program in the past or not. Abbring et al. (2005) and Van den Berg et al.
(2004) specify a model for reemployment durations in which the reemployment hazard depends on whether a punitive beneﬁts reduction has been
imposed in the past. Similarly, Van den Berg, Holm, and Van Ours (2002)
analyze the duration up to transition into medical trainee positions and
the effect of an intermediate transition into a medical assistant position
(a ‘‘stepping-stone job’’) on this duration.
These models ﬁt Abbring and Van den Berg’s (2003b) framework,
or a multistate extension thereof. The model considered by Abbring and Van
den Berg is a bivariate duration model in which realization of the outcome
duration censors the treatment duration, and realization of the treatment
duration changes the hazard of the outcome duration from that time onwards.
We can rephrase this type of model in terms of a simple event-history model
with state dependence as follows. Distinguish three states, untreated (O),
treated (P), and the exit state of interest (E), so that S={O,P,E}. All subjects
start in O, so that S0=O. Obviously, we do not want to allow for all possible
transitions between these three states. Instead, we restrict the correspondence
Z representing the possible transitions as follows:
8
s¼O
>
< fP; Eg
ZðsÞ ¼ fEg
if s ¼ P
>
:
;
s¼E
Simple state dependence of the transition rates into E will already capture
a treatment effect in the sense of Abbring and Van den Berg. Not all models
in their paper are, however, included in the simple semi-Markov setup
discussed here. In particular, in this chapter we do not allow the transition rate
from P to E to depend on the duration spent in O. This extension with ‘‘lagged
duration dependence’’ (Heckman & Borjas, 1980) would be required to
capture one variant of their model.
The model for transitions from ‘‘untreated’’ (O) is a competing-risks
model, with program enrollment (transition to P) and employment (E)
competing to end the untreated spell. If the unobservable factor VOE that
determines transitions to employment and the unobservable factor VOP

40

JAAP H. ABBRING

affecting program enrollment are dependent, then program enrollment is
selective in the sense that the distribution of VOE – and then typically that of
VPE – among those who enroll at a given point in time does not equal its
distribution among survivors in O up to that time.7
The second approach is used by, for example, Gritz (1993) and Bonnal
et al. (1997). Consider the following simpliﬁed setup. Suppose workers are
either employed (E), unemployed (O), or engaged in a training program (P).
We can now specify a transition process among these three labor-market
states in which a causal effect of training on unemployment and employment durations is modeled as dependence of the various transition rates on
the past occurrence of a training program in the labor-market history. Partly
to avoid initial-conditions problems, Bonnal et al. (1997) restrict attention
to ﬁrst-order lagged occurrence dependence. So, suppose that transition
rates only depend on the current and previous state occupied. Such
a model is not directly covered by the semi-Markov model, but with a
simple augmentation of the state space it will be. In particular, we have
to include lagged states in the state space on which the transition
process is deﬁned. Because there is no lagged state in the event history’s
ﬁrst spell, initial states should be deﬁned separately. So, instead of just
distinguishing states in S ¼ fE; O; Pg, we distinguish augmented states
in S ¼ fðs; s0 Þ 2 ðS [ IÞ  S : sas0 g. Then, (I,s), s 2 S , denote the initial
states, and ðs; s0 Þ 2 S the augmented state of an agent who is currently in su
and came from s6¼su. In order to preserve the interpretation of the model
as a model of lagged occurrence dependence, we have to exclude certain
transitions by specifying


Zðs; s0 Þ ¼ ðs0 ; s00 Þ; s00 2 S nfs0 g
This excludes transitions to augmented states that are labeled with a lagged
state different from the origin state. Also, it ensures that agents never return
to an initial state. For example, from the augmented state (O,P) – previously
unemployed and currently enrolled in a program – only transitions to
augmented states (P,sv) –previously enrolled in a program and currently in
sv – are possible. Moreover, it is not possible to be currently employed
and transiting to initially unemployed, (I,O). Rather, an employed who
loses his job would transit to (E,O) – currently unemployed and previously
employed.
The effects of, for example, training are now modeled as simple statedependence effects. For example, the effect of training on the transition rate
from unemployment to employment is simply the contrast between the

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

41

individual transition rate from (E,O) to (O,E) and the transition rate from
(P,O) to (O,E). Dynamic selection into the augmented states (E,O) and
(P,O), as speciﬁed by the transition model, confounds the empirical analysis
of these training effects. Note that there are no longer run effects of training
on transition rates from unemployment to employment due to the fact that
we have restricted attention to ﬁrst-order lagged occurrence dependence,
similar to Bonnal et al. (1997).

3. THE MODEL’S EMPIRICAL CONTENT
3.1. Sampling Scheme
Suppose that we randomly sample from the population of event histories
and observe the ﬁrst L transitions, including destinations, for each sampled
event history, with possibly L=N. Thus, we observe a random sample of
{(Tl,Sl), lA{0, 1, y, L}} and X. If LoN then our data are right censored; if
L=N they are not.8

3.2. Identification from First Transitions and Variation
in Initial Conditions
First, consider what can be learned from data on the ﬁrst transition from the
initial state S0 only. Denote the support of S0 by S0 . For j 2 S, let #ZðjÞ
denote the number of elements in ZðjÞ, i.e., the number of destination states
that are reached with positive probability from j. Consider the following
assumptions.
Assumption 1. (Vjk, k 2 ZðjÞ)@X|S0, for all j 2 S0 .
Assumption 2. E½V jk o1, for all k 2 ZðjÞ and j 2 S0 .
Assumption 3. The range fðfjk ðxÞ; k 2 ZðjÞÞ; x 2 Xg of the regressor
functions contains a nonempty open set in ð0; 1Þ#ZðjÞ , for all j 2 S0 .
These are multivariate extensions of assumptions that are standard in the
single-spell MPH literature (e.g., Elbers & Ridder, 1982). Assumption 1
requires independence of the observed covariates and the unobserved
heterogeneity in the relevant subpopulations. Because we only observe a
single transition from each origin state and cannot apply panel-data

42

JAAP H. ABBRING

techniques to deal with unobserved heterogeneity, this is necessary for the
identiﬁcation of the regressor functions fjk.
Assumption 2 is a technical, but far from innocuous, assumption (Ridder,
1990). Without it, the integrated baseline hazards Ljk and regressor
functions fjk can only be identiﬁed up to power transformations.9
Such transformations may substantially change the interpretation of
Ljk and fjk.
Finally, Assumption 3 ensures that there is independent variation with the
regressors of the individual hazard rates yjk(t|X,V) corresponding to the
various competing risks in state j. With fjk(x)=exp(xubjk), it would
be sufﬁcient that ðbjk ; k 2 ZðjÞÞ has full column rank and X contains a
nonempty open set in Rq , for all j 2 S0 . In turn, this could be achieved by
imposing exclusion restrictions of the sort encountered in instrumentalvariables analysis. However, such exclusion restrictions are not necessary for
Assumption 3 to hold.
We have the following result.
Proposition 1. If Assumptions 1–3 are satisﬁed, then ((fjk,Ljk),
j 2 S0 ; k 2 ZðjÞ) and the joint distributions of ðV jk ; k 2 ZðjÞÞjS0 ¼ j;
j 2 S0 , are identiﬁed from the distribution of DT1,S1|S0,X.
Proof. For each j 2 S0 , the model of DT1,S1|S0=j,X is an MPH
competing-risks model. The result follows from repeated application of
Abbring and Van den Berg (2003a, Proposition 2).10
Because the model for the ﬁrst transition from the initial state is an MPH
competing-risks model, the proof of Proposition 1 is a direct application of
Abbring and Van den Berg’s (2003a) identiﬁcation results for such models.
The intuition for these results comes in two stages.
First, consider the transition rate from state j to state k among those who
have survived for some time t in their initial state j,
ljk ðtÞfjk ðX ÞE½V jk jDT 1  t; S 0 ¼ j; X 
This ‘‘crude’’ hazard rate can be computed from the distribution of
DT1,S1|S0,X that Proposition 1 takes as data. For t>0, E½V jk jDT 1  t; S 0 ¼
j; X  typically depends on X, and variation of the crude hazard rate with the
covariates reﬂects both these selection effects and the agent-level effects
through fjk(X). However, because of Assumptions 1 and 2, E½V jk jDT 1  t;
S 0 ¼ j; X  reduces to E½V jk jS0 ¼ jo1 as tk0. Thus, near the start of the
spell, by Assumption 1, subpopulations with different regressor values are
similar in terms of their unobserved components. Therefore, we can identify

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

43

fjk by contrasting crude hazard rates between such subpopulations near the
start of the spell.
Second, note that, for t>0 and given fjk(X), the crude hazard rate above
can only depend on X through the selection effects on
E½V jk jDT 1  t; S 0 ¼ j; X  ¼ E½V jk jT 1jk0  t; k0 2 ZðjÞ; S0 ¼ j; X 
Now, suppose that V jk @ðV jk0 ; k0 2 ZðjÞnfkgÞjS0 ; X . Then, the event fT 1jk0  t;
k0 2 ZðjÞnfkgg is not informative on Vjk for given S0,X, and
E½V jk jDT 1  t; S0 ¼ j; X  ¼ E½V jk jT 1jk  t; S0 ¼ j; X 
Thus, in this case, E½V jk jDT 1  t; S 0 ¼ j; X , and therefore the crude hazard
rate, does not depend on X for given fjk(X). If Vjk (Vjku, k0 2 ZðjÞnfkg)|S0,
X, then E½V jk jDT 1  t; S0 ¼ j; X  depends on fjku(X) for given fjk(X)
through the dependence of Vjk and Vjku. In sum, independent variation
in fjku(X), k0 2 ZðjÞnfkg, and fjk(X) can be exploited to infer whether the
competing risks are dependent or not. Assumption 3 ensures that there is
such independent variation in the regressor effects.
In applications, like those in Section 2, we are typically interested in
contrasting the distributions of T 1jk and T 1j0 k in a subpopulation with given
values of X and S0, for some j, j 0 2 S0 and k 2 ZðjÞ \ Zðj 0 Þ. Such a contrast
can be interpreted as an average treatment effect on the given subpopulation.11 However, Proposition 1 only provides identiﬁcation conditional
on S0. In particular, it gives conditions under which we can construct the
distributions of T 1jk jS 0 ¼ j; X and T 1j0 k jS 0 ¼ j 0 ; X . The contrast between
these distributions reﬂects both causal treatment effects and selection into
the initial state. This is the standard problem of causal inference. Some
standard solutions to this problem, adapted to this event-history setting, are
the following.12
First, we could assume that assignment to initial states is ‘‘randomized’’:
Assumption 4. V@S0.
This, with Assumption 1, would allow us to identify the distributions of
T 1jk jX and T 1jk jX ; S 0 – our objects of interest – with that of T 1jk jS 0 ¼ j; X .
The latter is identiﬁed by Proposition 1.
Second, we could rely on instruments to generate random variation in
S0. Abbring and Van den Berg’s (2005) nonparametric and semiparametric results for single-spell duration outcomes apply directly to the
special case that there is only one destination from the initial states. Their
extension to competing-risks outcomes is required in the general case.

44

JAAP H. ABBRING

The MPH structure will prove key here in separating the effects on the
competing risks.13

3.3. Dynamic Selection
The event-history approach to program evaluation does not rely on random
variation in the initial state, but instead exploits variation in the states that
arises in the course of the event history due to transitions. There is a close
connection to the selection-model literature: Dynamic selection into states is
modeled jointly with outcomes by means of the mixed semi-Markov eventhistory model.
This approach is particularly relevant in the important case in which
there is no variation at all in the initial state, and S0 is degenerate. Then,
Assumption 4 is trivially satisﬁed, but there is no scope for contrasting
transitions from different initial states. In this case, all variation in states
arises dynamically according to the mixed semi-Markov transition process.
Multiple spells (L>1) are needed to compare transition rates from different
origin states.
A selection problem arises if the probability, conditional on X,V, that the
state of interest is never occupied during the observed event history depends
on V for given X. This is typically the case if only a ﬁnite number L of spells
is observed, so that there is censoring.14 Without censoring, if L=N, it is
often true that the state of interest is almost surely occupied at some point
during the event history. Then, the sample of event histories’ ﬁrst spells in
the state of interest does not suffer from selection on unobservables;
standard competing-risks results then give full identiﬁcation. Similarly, if
both the ﬁrst and the second spell in a state of interest occur almost surely,
the much stronger results for multispell competing-risks models of Abbring
and Van den Berg (2003a) can be applied.
Obviously, these results are of little empirical relevance, as we typically
observe only a limited number of spells in any event history, and panel
data are subject to other types of censoring. However, they highlight
that dynamic selection problems arise either because of restrictions on the
event-history process that lead to selective occurrence of ﬁrst (and higher)
spells in given states, or because of limited observability of event histories,
e.g., due to censoring.
In the remainder of this section, we will analyze under what conditions the
structure imposed on the mixed semi-Markov model in Section 2 sufﬁces for
identiﬁcation of state dependence and treatment effects.

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

45

3.4. Identification from Censored Event Histories
Let j 2 S be accessible from S0, so that Pr(Sl=j)>0 for some lZ0, and let
k 2 ZðjÞ. Consider the identiﬁcation of the determinants of yjk. Let
L(j):=min{lZ0: Pr(Sl=j)>0} be the smallest number of transitions from
S0 through which j is accessible. Then, we need data on at least L(j)+1
spells to identify the determinants of yjk. Take some u0, u1, y, uL(j)+1 such
that Pr(S0=u0, y, SL(j)+1 = uL(j)+1)>0, uL(j)=j, and uL(j)+1=k. We
approach the identiﬁcation of the determinants of yjk by considering the
identiﬁcation of the determinants of
PrðS 0 ¼ u0 ; . . . ; SLðjÞþ1 ¼ uLðjÞþ1 ; DT 1 4t1 ; . . . ; DT LðjÞþ1 4tLðjÞþ1 jX ; V Þ
. In turn, these can be expressed in terms of the
for ðt1 ; . . . ; tLðjÞþ1 Þ 2 RLðjÞþ1
þ
transition intensities corresponding to the origin–destination pairs in
X :¼ fðs; s0 Þ 2 S2 : s 2 fu0 ; . . . ; uLðjÞ g; s0 2 ZðsÞg. Note that, along with the
identiﬁcation of yjk’s determinants, we consider identiﬁcation of the
selection process into the state j. This selection process is modeled as a
repeated competing-risks model, and its identiﬁcation will again exploit
results from the competing-risks literature.
We make the following assumptions.
Assumption 5. (Vp,pAX)@X|S0.
Assumption 6. For all s 2 Zðu0 Þ, E½V u0 s o1. For all s 2 Zðul Þ;
E½V u0 u1    V ul1 ul V ul s o1; l ¼ 1; . . . ; LðjÞ.
These assumptions generalize Assumptions 1 and 2 to the case of multiple
transitions, but for a single initial state u0. Assumption 5 requires that
the unobserved factors relevant to the chosen path from u0 to k, including
those corresponding to the pairs in Zðu0 Þ, are jointly independent of X,
given S0. Assumption 6 again facilitates inference on regressor effects at
short durations. The higher moments appear in probabilistic expressions
involving histories with multiple short spells. Together with Assumption 5, it
allows us to derive the following result.
Proposition 2. If Assumptions 5 and 6 are satisﬁed, then (fp, pAX) is
identiﬁed from the distribution of {(DTl, Sl), l=1, y, L(j)+1}|S0,X.
Proof. See the appendix.
With Assumption 4 and a generalization of Assumption 3 to the case of
multiple transitions, we can extend this result to identiﬁcation of the full

46

JAAP H. ABBRING

model. Let Xðul Þ :¼ ful g  Zðul Þ be the set of all origin–destination pairs
with origin ul.
Assumption 7. For l=0, y, L(j), the set
fðLp ðtiþ1 Þfp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðui Þ; i ¼ 0; . . . ; lÞ; x 2 X; ðt1; . . . ; tl Þ 2 Rlþ ; tlþ1 ¼ t g
contains a nonempty open set in ð0; 1Þ

Pl
i¼0

#Xðui Þ

.

A sufﬁcient condition for Assumption 7 is that the range {(fp(x), pAX),
x 2 X} of the regressor functions contains a nonempty open set in (0, N)#X.
If fp(x)=exp(xubp), it would be sufﬁcient that (bp, pAX) has full column
rank and X contains a nonempty open set in Rq . However, Assumption 7 is
substantially weaker, as it allows us to substitute variation in the durations
of previous spells for regressor variation.
We have the following result.
Proposition 3. If Assumptions 4–7 are satisﬁed, then ((fp, Lp), pAX) and
the joint distribution of (Vp, pAX) are identiﬁed from the distribution of
{(DTl,Sl), l=1, y, L(j)+1}|S0,X.
Proof. See the appendix.
The model for the ﬁrst L(j) transitions is a repeated MPH competing-risks
model, and the proof of Proposition 3 iteratively applies an identiﬁcation
strategy similar to that of Abbring and Van den Berg (2003a) for the
competing-risks model. In particular, identiﬁcation of the determinants
of the ﬁrst transition from u0 is proved analogously to Proposition 1 (or,
similarly, Abbring & Van den Berg, 2003a, Proposition 2). With this in
hand, we can proceed to identiﬁcation of the determinants of the transition
from u1, exploiting knowledge of the determinants of the ﬁrst transition, etc.
Proposition 3 establishes identiﬁability of the determinants of yjk from
event histories that include only a single spell in state j. If we have data on
sufﬁciently long event histories, we may be able to observe multiple spells in
state j. The literature on the identiﬁability of multispell duration models
(Honoré, 1993; Abbring & Van den Berg, 2003a, 2003b) suggests that many
of our assumptions, including the proportional-hazards assumption, can be
relaxed in this case. We will not further pursue this here.

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

47

4. ALTERNATIVE SAMPLING SCHEMES
We have analyzed identiﬁability of the mixed semi-Markov event-history
model from a random sample of censored event histories. In empirical practice,
we often have to deal with alternative, more complex sampling schemes.
We distinguish two cases: inﬂow sampling and stock sampling (e.g.,
Lancaster, 1990, ch. 8). With inﬂow sampling, we sample from the ﬂow into
a given subset of states during some time interval. Due to dynamic selection,
the distribution of X,V in an inﬂow sample is typically not the same as its
distribution in the population. With stock sampling, we sample from the
stock in a given set of states at a certain moment in time. Again,
the distribution of X,V in a stock sample is generally not the same as its
population distribution. Moreover, conditional on X,V, the distribution
of the spells ongoing at the sampling date will not be the population
distribution in this case either.
Various ways to model inﬂow and stock samples have been proposed in
the literature (see, e.g., Heckman & Singer, 1984a, 1986; Lancaster, 1990).
In the case of inﬂow sampling, we could replace Assumption 5 by an ad hoc
assumption on the distribution of the covariates in the inﬂow. We could
make similar ad hoc assumptions in the stock-sampling case, together with
an assumption on the historical development of the inﬂow into the states
from which we sample. One common assumption is that the inﬂow has been
constant over time.
As Lancaster (1990, Section 8.4.2) points out, the common ad hoc
assumptions on the distribution of the covariates are likely to be mutually
inconsistent between the various sampling schemes. This suggests that we only
make assumptions on the population, such as Assumption 5, and derive the
distributions of the various samples from the population model. In general,
this is hard because the distributions of the inﬂow and stock samples depend
on that of the full event history, including its initial conditions T0,S0.
An elegant solution is to assume that the samples are drawn from the
event histories’ long-run equilibrium distributions. This is only appropriate
in carefully selected applications, and requires ergodicity of the semiMarkov model for the individual event histories. The resulting models for
the inﬂow and stock samples are easy to derive and handle (Lancaster,
1990). In general, they involve dependent observable and unobservable
covariates even under Assumption 5. However, this dependence is very
tightly structured. We conjecture that this structure can be exploited to
prove identiﬁability under conditions not unlike those for the case of
sampling from the population. This is a topic for future research.

48

JAAP H. ABBRING

5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper reviews the use of event-history models to simultaneously model
dynamic selection into programs and the causal effects of the participation
in such programs on event-history outcomes. A leading example is the
analysis of the effects of training programs for the unemployed on their
unemployment durations and subsequent job stability. We have provided
novel identiﬁcation results for a particular class of event-history models with
a mixed semi-Markov structure. In doing so, we have highlighted and
exploited the central role of dependent competing-risks models.
We have focused on identiﬁcation of causal and selection effects from
‘‘ideal’’, large data sets and have ignored sampling variation. Therefore, our
results cannot be implemented directly in empirical practice. Instead, they
explore the logical limits on what we can reasonably expect to learn about
causal effects of dynamic programs from observational data. As such, they
can guide the empirical analysis of causal program effects using appropriate
event-history models.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by a fellowship of the Royal Netherlands
Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW).

NOTES
1. See Heckman and Vytlacil (2007) for a review of the program evaluation
literature, Abbring and Heckman (2007, 2008) for studies of the microeconometric
treatment-effect and structural approaches to dynamic policy evaluation, and
Abbring and Van den Berg (2004) for a discussion of the relation between the eventhistory approach to program evaluation and standard latent-variable and panel-data
methods.
2. We restrict attention to time-invariant observed covariates for expositional
convenience. The analysis can easily be adapted to more general time-varying
external covariates. Restricting attention to time-constant regressors is a worst-case
scenario for identiﬁcation: External time variation in observed covariates aids
identiﬁcation (Heckman & Taber, 1994).
3. Abbring and Van den Berg (2003b) make their model’s causal structure explicit
in a potential-outcomes model of the causal effects of a treatment time on an
outcome duration. Abbring (2003) and Abbring and Heckman (2007, 2008) present
the symmetric extension of this model, a nonparametric structural bivariate duration
model allowing for simultaneous causal dependence of both durations. Extending

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

49

this further to the general event-history setup adds a lot of complexity, but little extra
insight.
4. Throughout the chapter, we assume that Z is known. It is important to note,
however, that Z can actually be identiﬁed trivially in all the cases considered.
5. The MPH model is an extension of the Cox (1972) proportional hazard model
by Lancaster (1979) and Vaupel, Manton, and Stallard (1979).
6. This can easily be relaxed, but at the expense of some extra notation and
technical conditions.
7. Note that, in addition, the survivors in O themselves are a selected
subpopulation: Because V affects survival in O, the distribution of V among
survivors in O is not equal to its population distribution.
8. Our results can be adapted to other common censoring schemes, such as
censoring at some nonrandom ﬁnite time. See Andersen et al. (1993) for an overview
of censoring schemes.
9. Ridder and Woutersen (2003) prove semiparametric identiﬁcation of a singlespell MPH model under an alternative assumption on the baseline hazard that is
equally substantial.
10. Abbring and Van den Berg study the case with two risks, but the extension to
more than two risks is trivial.
11. Abbring and Van den Berg (2005) discuss the deﬁnition of treatment effects in
duration models. They argue that the usual treatment effects deﬁned in terms of the
distributions of potential outcome durations confound effects on individual hazard
rates and effects that operate through dynamic selection. Recursive economic models
often primarily predict effects on individual hazard rates, and semiparametric
structure, such as the MPH model, is needed to identify such effects. Here, we do not
explicitly address this issue.
12. See, e.g., Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith (1999) for an overview.
13. In addition, semiparametric structure will be important if one is interested in
treatment effects on individual hazard rates. See Footnote 11.
14. Abbring and Van den Berg (2005) relate a similar argument for the case of
simple random censoring to the dynamic selection problems studied by Ham and
LaLonde (1996).

REFERENCES
Abbring, J. H. (2002). Stayers versus defecting movers: A note on the identiﬁcation of defective
duration models. Economics Letters, 74, 327–331.
Abbring, J. H. (2003). Dynamic econometric program evaluation. Discussion Paper no. 804.
IZA, Bonn. Paper prepared for the H. Theil Memorial Conference, Amsterdam,
August 16–18, 2002.
Abbring, J. H. (2007). Mixed hitting-time models. Discussion Paper no. 07–057/3. Tinbergen
Institute, Amsterdam.
Abbring, J. H., & Heckman, J. J. (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, Part III:
Distributional treatment effects, dynamic treatment effects, dynamic discrete choice, and
general equilibrium policy evaluation. In: J. J. Heckman & E. E. Leamer (Eds),
Handbook of econometrics (Vol. 6B, Ch. 72). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

50

JAAP H. ABBRING

Abbring, J. H., & Heckman, J. J. (2008). Dynamic policy analysis. In: L. Mátyás &
P. Sevestre (Eds), The econometrics of panel data (3rd ed., Ch. 24). Dordrecht:
Springer.
Abbring, J. H., & Van den Berg, G. J. (2003a). The identiﬁability of the mixed proportional
hazards competing risks model. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 65,
701–710.
Abbring, J. H., & Van den Berg, G. J. (2003b). The non-parametric identiﬁcation of treatment
effects in duration models. Econometrica, 71, 1491–1517.
Abbring, J. H., & Van den Berg, G. J. (2004). Analyzing the effect of dynamically assigned
treatments using duration models, binary treatment models, and panel data models.
Empirical Economics, 29, 5–20.
Abbring, J. H., & Van den Berg, G. J. (2005). Social experiments and instrumental variables with
duration outcomes. Discussion Paper no. 05–047/3. Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam.
Abbring, J. H., Van den Berg, G. J., & Van Ours, J. C. (2005). The effect of unemployment
insurance sanctions on the transition rate from unemployment to employment. Economic
Journal, 115, 602–630.
Andersen, P. K., Borgan, Ø., Gill, R. D., & Keiding, N. (1993). Statistical models based on
counting processes. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Bonnal, L., Fougère, D., & Sérandon, A. (1997). Evaluating the impact of French employment
policies on individual labour market histories. Review of Economic Studies, 64,
683–713.
Carathéodory, C. (1918). Vorlesungen über Reelle Funktionen. Leipzig: Teubner.
Card, D., & Sullivan, D. (1988). Measuring the effect of subsidized training programs on
movements in and out of employment. Econometrica, 56, 497–530.
Cox, D. R. (1972). Regression models and life-tables (with discussion). Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series B, 34, 187–202.
Eberwein, C., Ham, J. C., & LaLonde, R. J. (1997). The impact of being offered and receiving
classroom training on the employment histories of disadvantaged women: Evidence from
experimental data. Review of Economic Studies, 64, 655–682.
Elbers, C., & Ridder, G. (1982). True and spurious duration dependence: The identiﬁability of
the proportional hazard model. Review of Economic Studies, 64, 403–409.
Gritz, R. M. (1993). The impact of training on the frequency and duration of employment.
Journal of Econometrics, 57, 21–51.
Ham, J. C., & LaLonde, R. J. (1996). The effect of sample selection and initial conditions
in duration models: Evidence from experimental data on training. Econometrica, 64,
175–205.
Heckman, J. J. (1981a). Heterogeneity and state dependence. In: S. Rosen (Ed.), Studies in labor
markets (pp. 91–139). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J. (1981b). The incidental parameters problem and the problem of initial
conditions in estimating a discrete time-discrete data stochastic process and some Monte
Carlo evidence. In: C. Manski & D. McFadden (Eds), Structural analysis of discrete data
with econometric applications (pp. 179–195). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Heckman, J. J., & Borjas, G. J. (1980). Does unemployment cause future unemployment?
Deﬁnitions, questions and answers from a continuous time model of heterogeneity and
state dependence. Economica, 47(187), 247–283. Special issue on unemployment.
Heckman, J. J., & Honoré, B. E. (1989). The identiﬁability of the competing risks model.
Biometrika, 76(2), 325–330.

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

51

Heckman, J. J., LaLonde, R. J., & Smith, J. A. (1999). The economics and econometrics of
active labor market programs. In: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (Eds), Handbook of labor
economics (Vol. 3A, Ch. 31, pp. 1865–2097). New York: North-Holland.
Heckman, J. J., & Singer, B. S. (1984a). Econometric duration analysis. Journal of
Econometrics, 24(1–2), 63–132.
Heckman, J. J., & Singer, B. S. (1984b). The identiﬁability of the proportional hazard model.
Review of Economics Studies, 51(2), 231–243.
Heckman, J. J., & Singer, B. S. (1986). Econometric analysis of longitudinal data. In:
Z. Griliches & M. D. Intriligator (Eds), Handbook of econometrics (Vol. 3, Ch. 29,
pp. 1690–1763). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Heckman, J. J., & Taber, C. (1994). Econometric mixture models and more general models for
unobservables in duration analysis. Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 3(3),
279–299.
Heckman, J. J., & Vytlacil, E. J. (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, Part I:
Causal models, structural models and econometric policy evaluation. In: J. J. Heckman &
E. E. Leamer (Eds), Handbook of econometrics (Vol. 6B, Ch. 70). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Honoré, B. E. (1993). Identiﬁcation results for duration models with multiple spells. Review of
Economic Studies, 60, 241–246.
Keiding, N. (1999). Event history analysis and inference from observational epidemiology.
Statistics in Medicine, 18, 2353–2363.
Kortram, R., Lenstra, A., Ridder, G., & Van Rooij, A. (1995). Constructive identiﬁcation of the
mixed proportional hazards model. Statistica Neerlandica, 49, 269–281.
Lancaster, T. (1979). Econometric methods for the duration of unemployment. Econometrica,
47, 939–956.
Lancaster, T. (1990). The econometric analysis of transition data. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Meyer, B. (1990). Unemployment insurance and unemployment spells. Econometrica, 58,
757–782.
Ridder, G. (1986). An event history approach to the evaluation of training, recruitment and
employment programmes. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1, 109–126.
Ridder, G. (1990). The non-parametric identiﬁcation of generalized accelerated failure-time
models. Review of Economic Studies, 57, 167–182.
Ridder, G., & Woutersen, T. (2003). The singularity of the information matrix of the mixed
proportional hazard model. Econometrica, 71, 1579–1589.
Tsiatis, A. A. (1975). A nonidentiﬁability aspect of the problem of competing risks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 72, 20–22.
Van den Berg, G. J. (2001). Duration models: Speciﬁcation, identiﬁcation, and multiple
durations. In: J. J. Heckman & E. E. Leamer (Eds), Handbook of econometrics (Vol. 5,
Ch. 55, pp. 3381–3460). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Van den Berg, G. J., Holm, A., & Van Ours, J. C. (2002). Do stepping-stone jobs exist? Early
career paths in the medical profession. Journal of Population Economics, 15, 647–665.
Van den Berg, G. J., Van der Klaauw, B., & Van Ours, J. C. (2004). Punitive sanctions
and the transition rate from welfare to work. Journal of Labor Economics, 22,
211–241.
Vaupel, J. W., Manton, K. G., & Stallard, E. (1979). The impact of heterogeneity in individual
frailty on the dynamics of mortality. Demography, 16, 439–454.
Widder, D. V. (1946). The Laplace transform. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

52

JAAP H. ABBRING

APPENDIX
AN AUXILIARY RESULT
The proofs use a result for completely monotone functions. Completely
monotone functions are frequently encountered in statistical duration
analysis in the form of (derivatives of) Laplace transforms. They are
formally deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 1. Let O be a nonempty open set in Rn . A function f : O ! R is
absolutely monotone if it is nonnegative and has nonnegative continuous
partial derivatives of all orders. f is completely monotone if f o m is
absolutely monotone, where m : x 2 fo 2 Rn : o 2 Og7!  x.
Note that for n=1, this deﬁnition reduces to the familiar deﬁnition in
Widder (1946). Abbring and Van den Berg (2003a, Proposition 1) state the
following result.
Proposition 4. Let C be a nonempty open connected set in Rn , and
f : C ! R and g : C ! R be completely monotone. If f and g agree on a
nonempty open set in C, then f=g.
The proof of Proposition 4 exploits two facts that are well known for
functions on R and that are also true for functions on Rn : (i) completely
monotone functions are real analytic and (ii) real analytic functions are
uniquely determined by their values on a nonempty open set.

PROOFS
For lZ0, let Sl0 denote the support of (S0, S1, y, Sl). As an extension of
Tsiatis (1975), we can represent the ‘‘data’’ of the identiﬁcation analysis
of Section 3.4, the distribution of {(DTl,Sl), l=1, y, L(j)+1}|S0,X, by a
collection fQsLðjÞþ1 ðjxÞ; s 2 SLðjÞþ1
; x 2 Xg such that QsLðjÞþ1 ðtjX Þ equals
0
PrðDT 1 4t1 ; S 1 ¼ s1 ; . . . ; DT LðjÞþ1 4tLðjÞþ1 ; S LðjÞþ1 ¼ sLðjÞþ1 jX ; S0 ¼ s0 Þ
almost surely, for all s :¼ ðs0 ; . . . ; sLðjÞþ1 Þ 2 S0LðjÞþ1 and t :¼ ðt1 ; . . . ; tLðjÞþ1 Þ
2 RLðjÞþ1
.
þ
From these data, we can derive Qlsl , deﬁned analogously to QsLðjÞþ1 ;
0
P
and Rlsl1 :¼ s2Zðsl1 Þ Qlsl1 s ; for l ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; LðjÞ þ 1; sl1
:¼ ðs0 ; . . . ; sl1 Þ
0
0

l
l
2 Sl1
0 , and s0 2 S0 .

0

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

53

Note that Rlsl1 ðtl1 jX Þ equals
0

PrðDT 1 4t1 ; S 1 ¼ s1 ; . . . ; DT l1 4tl1 ; S l1 ¼ sl1 ; DT l 4tl jX ; S 0 ¼ s0 Þ
l
l
almost surely, for all sl1
2 Sl1
0 ; t1 :¼ ðt1 ; . . . ; tl Þ 2 Rþ ; and l=1,2, y,
0
L(j)+1.

Proof of Proposition 2. The proof proceeds iteratively. First,
consider identiﬁcation of fp for p 2 Xðu0 Þ. Pick an arbitrary x 2 X.
Note that Q1p ðjxÞ and Q1p ðjxn Þ are differentiable almost everywhere, and
that
fp ðxÞ ¼ lim
t#0

@Q1p ðtjxÞ=@t
@Q1p ðtjxn Þ=@t

because of Assumptions 5 and 6 and the normalization fp(x)=1.
Because x is arbitrary, this identiﬁes (fp ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ).
Next, iterate the following argument for l=1, y, L(j). Supposing
that fu0 u1 ; . . . ; ful1 u1 are identiﬁed, consider the identiﬁcation of fp for
lþ1
n
p 2 Xðul Þ. Pick an arbitrary x 2 X. Note that Qlþ1
s ðjxÞ and Qs ðjx Þ are
differentiable almost everywhere, and that
fu0 u1 ðxÞ    ful1 ul ðxÞful s ðxÞ ¼ lim
t#0

@lþ1 Qlþ1
s ðtjxÞ=@t1    @tlþ1
lþ1 lþ1
@ Qs ðtjxn Þ=@t1    @tlþ1

with s=(u0, y,ul,s), s 2 Zðul Þ, and t=(tl, y,tl+1). Here, we have used
Assumptions 5 and 6 and the normalizations fu0 u1 ðxn Þ ¼    ¼ ful1 ul ðxn Þ ¼
ful s ðxn Þ ¼ 1. Because x is arbitrary, this identiﬁes (fp ; p 2 Xðul Þ).
Proof of Proposition 3. (fp ; p 2 X) is identiﬁed by Proposition 2. The
remainder of the proof again proceeds iteratively.
First, Assumptions 4 and 5 and the normalizations Lp ðt Þ ¼ 1;
p 2 Xðu0 Þ, imply that
R1u0 ðtn jxÞ ¼ LXðu0 Þ ðfp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðu0 ÞÞ
where LXðu0 Þ is the Laplace transform of the joint distribution of
(V p ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ). Note that R1u0 ðt jÞ and (fp ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ) are identiﬁed at this
point. So, by Assumption 7 we can trace out LXðu0 Þ on a nonempty open
set in ð0; 1Þ#Xðu0 Þ . Because LXðu0 Þ is completely monotone, this identiﬁes
LXðu0 Þ by Proposition 4. By implication, (Dp LXðu0 Þ ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ) is identiﬁed,

54

JAAP H. ABBRING

with Dp LXðu0 Þ being the partial derivative of LXðu0 Þ with respect to the
argument corresponding to V p ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ.
Pick an arbitrary x. For almost all tA(0,N)
L0p ðtÞ ¼

@Q1p ðtjxÞ=@t
fp ðxÞDp LXðu0 Þ ðLp0 ðtÞfp0 ðxÞ; p0 2 Xðu0 ÞÞ

;

p 2 Xðu0 Þ

by Assumptions 4 and 5. These #Xðu0 Þ equations form a system of
differential equations in (L0p ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ), (Lp ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ), and t, with initial
conditions Lp ðt Þ ¼ 1; p 2 Xðu0 Þ, in the sense of Carathéodory (1918).
Analogous to Abbring and Van den Berg (2003a, Proposition 2), this
system can be shown to have a unique solution (Lp ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ) in terms of
(Q1p ; Dp LXðu0 Þ , fp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ). Because the latter have been identiﬁed at
this point, this establishes the identiﬁcation of (Lp ; p 2 Xðu0 Þ).
Second, iterate the following argument for l=1, y, L(j). Suppose that
l1
(Lp ; p 2 Xðul1
:¼ ðu0 ; . . . ; ul1 Þ and Xðul1
0 Þ) is identiﬁed, with u0
0 Þ :¼
l1
[i¼0 Xðui Þ. By Assumptions 4 and 5, the lth partial derivative
Dul LXðul Þ of LXðul Þ with respect to the arguments corresponding to
0
0
0
V u0 u1 ; . . . ; V ul1 ul satisﬁes
Dul LXðul Þ ðLp ðtiþ1 Þfp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðui Þ; i ¼ 0; . . . lÞ ¼
0

0

@Rlþ1
ðtlþ1
1 jxÞ=@t1    @tl
ul
0

Pli¼1 L0ui1 ui ðti Þfui1 ui ðxÞ

for almost all tl1 2 Rlþ , all tlþ1 2 Rþ , and all x 2 X. Because the right-hand
side is known at this point, this identiﬁes
Dul LXðul Þ ðLp ðtiþ1 Þfp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðui Þ; i ¼ 0; . . . ; lÞ
0

0

2 Rlþ1
and x 2 X. Moreover, with the normalizations
for all tlþ1
þ
1

Lp ðt Þ ¼ 1; p 2 Xðul Þ, (Lp ðtiþ1 Þfp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðui Þ; i ¼ 0; . . . ; l) is identiﬁed
for all tl1 2 Rlþ ; tlþ1 ¼ tn , and x 2 X at this point. So, by Assumption 7, we
l
can trace out Dul LXðul Þ on a nonempty open set in ð0; 1Þ#Xðu0 Þ . Because
0
0
ð1Þl Dul LXðul Þ is completely monotone, this identiﬁes Dul LXðul Þ by
0
0
0
0
Proposition 4. By implication, ðDul s LXðul Þ ; s 2 Zðul ÞÞ is identiﬁed.
0
0
Pick an arbitrary x. Pick ti such that Lui1 ui is differentiable at ti,
i=1, y, l. For almost all tl+1A(0,N)


1
l
L0ul s ðtlþ1 Þ ¼ ful s ðxÞ P L0ui1 ui ðti Þfui1 ui ðxÞ
i¼1



@Qlþ1
ðtlþ1 jxÞ=@t1    @tlþ1
ul s 1
0

Dul s LXðul Þ ðLp ðtiþ1 Þfp ðxÞ; p 2 Xðui Þ; i ¼ 0; . . . ; lÞ
0

0

(A.1)
;

s 2 Zðul Þ

The Event-History Approach to Program Evaluation

55

by Assumptions 4 and 5. These #Xðul Þ equations again form system of
differential equations in the sense of Caratheodory (1918), now in
ðL0p ; p 2 Xðul ÞÞ, ðLp ; p 2 Xðul ÞÞ, and tlþ1 , with initial conditions
Lp ðtn Þ ¼ 1; p 2 Xðul Þ. Standard theory can again be applied to show that
this system has a unique solution ðLp ; p 2 Xðul ÞÞ in terms of


l
0
lþ1
Qul s ; Dul s LXðul Þ; ful s ðxÞ P Lui1 ui ðti Þfui1 ui ðxÞ; s 2 Zðul Þ
0

0

0

i¼1

Because the latter is identiﬁed at this point, this establishes the identiﬁcation of ðLp ; p 2 Xðul ÞÞ.
Finally, note that LX is identiﬁed by integrating DuLðjÞ LX . In turn, LX
0
identiﬁes the joint distribution of (V p ; p 2 X) by the uniqueness of the
multivariate Laplace transform.
&

