Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 5 (September, 2003), 1491–1517

THE NONPARAMETRIC IDENTIFICATION OF TREATMENT
EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS
BY JAAP H. ABBRING AND GERARD J. VAN DEN BERG1
This paper analyzes the specification and identification of causal multivariate duration models. We focus on the case in which one duration concerns the point in time
a treatment is initiated and we are interested in the effect of this treatment on some
outcome duration. We define “no anticipation of treatment” and relate it to a common
assumption in biostatistics. We show that (i) no anticipation and (ii) randomized treatment assignment can be imposed without restricting the observational data. We impose
(i) but not (ii) and prove identification of models that impose some structure. We allow
for dependent unobserved heterogeneity and we do not exploit exclusion restrictions on
covariates. We provide results for both single-spell and multiple-spell data. The timing
of events conveys useful information on the treatment effect.
KEYWORDS: Program evaluation, bivariate duration analysis, selectivity bias, hazard
rate, partial likelihood, unobserved heterogeneity, anticipation.

1. INTRODUCTION
THIS PAPER DISCUSSES THE SPECIFICATION and identification of causal multivariate duration models in economics. Consider a subject in a certain state.
After a stochastic amount of time, the subject leaves this state. A different
type of event may occur at some other random time. We are interested in the
causal effect of the latter event on the duration in the state of interest. Examples include the effect of training programs or punitive benefits reductions on
unemployment durations, the effect of the hiring of replacement workers on
strike durations, and the effect of promotions on tenure. In biostatistics one
is often interested in the effect of a specific medical treatment. We borrow
this terminology and refer to training programs, punitive benefits reductions,
et cetera, as “treatments,” to their causal effects on the outcome durations as
“treatment effects,” and to the subjects as “individuals.”
At the core of the paper is a discussion of the causal relation between two
durations, the outcome duration Y and the treatment time S. A duration is
simply a nonnegative random variable and it may seem that we can apply standard models for two nonnegative random variables. However, in an explicitly
dynamic model framework it is easier to discuss censoring and time aggregation, and handle cases where the treatment may not be observed, or even
well-defined, after the subject has left the state of interest. We specify such a
1
Thanks to Jim Heckman, Bo Honoré, Hide Ichimura, John Kennan, Tony Lancaster, Geert
Ridder, Michael Visser, Ed Vytlacil, the editor, and anonymous referees for useful comments and
suggestions. Also thanks to seminar participants at UCL London, NYU, IFAU Uppsala, Chicago,
Iowa, Stockholm School of Economics, Mannheim, Bristol, INSEE-CREST, Tinbergen Institute
Amsterdam, and participants at various conferences. Jaap Abbring acknowledges financial support by the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.

1491

1492

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

dynamic model framework in terms of the hazard rates corresponding to Y
and S. Hazard rates are the focal points and basic building blocks of econometric duration models. Dynamic economic theories often aim to explain the
rate of leaving a state of interest in terms of economic behavior and external
conditions (see Van den Berg (2001) for a survey).
We construct a causal model that specifies how the outcome varies if we hypothetically manipulate the treatment time. The model also specifies a (not
necessarily randomized) treatment process. Biostatistical studies routinely impose a “consistency” condition that can be interpreted as claiming that each
cause should precede its effect (e.g. Robins (1998) and Lok (2001)). Formally,
it requires that the outcome (transition) paths corresponding to any two treatment times coincide up to a duration y if the treatment (transition) paths are
the same up to y. In more familiar terms, the subject should be in the same
outcome state at time y if both treatments start after y. We impose a weak version of this condition that only requires that the corresponding hazard paths
coincide up to y. In economics this embodies a substantial informational and
behavioral assumption. It requires that individuals either have no access to information on treatment beyond that encoded in the treatment history up to y
or simply do not act on that information, at each time y. Otherwise, there are
anticipatory effects of future treatment and our consistency condition is violated. Therefore, we refer to this condition as a “no-anticipation” assumption.
Rational forward-looking individuals may be expected to exploit information on the (perceived) properties of the treatment assignment process. In
that case, changes in these properties may affect the hazard rate out of the
state of interest before any actual realization of a treatment. Our model framework enables the specification of such effects. Our analysis, however, focuses
on contrasting outcomes between different realized treatment times for a given
assignment mechanism. This is already an ambitious task. We prove a basic
nonidentification theorem that states that no-anticipation and randomized assignment of treatment can be imposed on the causal model without restricting the observational data. This highlights two inference problems. First, we
cannot identify anticipation effects of treatment. Second, we have the standard econometric selection problem. Without further assumptions, we cannot
distinguish between causal effects and selection effects. In the identification
analysis we take the no-anticipation assumption as fundamental and we only
address the selection issue. It should be judged in each application whether it
makes sense to assume that the observed treatment cannot be anticipated.
Identification requires further structure. We build on the assumption that
all selection effects can be captured by related observed and unobserved covariates in the treatment and outcome processes. We examine single-spell and
multiple-spell settings. Single-spell data provide information on a single outcome spell and possibly treatment for each individual. We prove identification
of two bivariate duration models that allow for time-varying and heterogeneous treatment effects and that borrow structure from the well-known non-

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1493

parametric2 mixed proportional hazard (MPH) model. MPH models are the
most popular reduced-form duration models in econometrics (see Van den
Berg (2001) for a survey).
With multiple-spell data we observe multiple outcome spells, with or without
treatment, for each individual or within groups of individuals who share the
same unobservable characteristics. We prove identification of multiple-spell
model generalizations. In particular, we can allow for general nonproportionalities. The single-spell results concern bivariate models that embed a marginal
model for the treatment process, or a “selection equation.” For the multiplespell case we show that it is sufficient to specify the conditional outcome model
in order to identify treatment effects.
This paper contributes to the extensive literature on the econometric evaluation of social programs and treatment effects (see Heckman, LaLonde, and
Smith (1999) for an overview). This literature provides relatively little insight
in problems with dynamically assigned treatments and duration outcomes. We
provide some guidance in tackling such problems, which are frequently encountered in empirical research. We also complement the closely related biostatistical literature (e.g. Robins (1998)). This literature allows for more complex dynamic treatment regimes, but is not tailored to economic problems and
data. We offer a dynamic economic perspective on the causal model and identification results for models with unobserved selection effects that cannot be
found in the biostatistical literature. Our identification approach is complementary to an approach in which regularity assumptions are made that are insufficient for point-identification but that allow for the identification of bounds
for a treatment effect (see, e.g., Manski (1990, 1997)).
Our identification results also extend the existing literature on the nonparametric identification of MPH-type duration models (see the surveys in Heckman and Taber (1994) and Van den Berg (2001)). The conditional outcome
parts of our models can be interpreted as univariate duration models with
an endogenous time-varying regressor (the treatment process), where the endogeneity originates from a dependence on unobserved characteristics. We
demonstrate that these models are identified under similar assumptions as
those in the literature.
The empirical literature contains studies in which models are estimated that
are similar to the models we consider. For example, Card and Sullivan (1988),
Gritz (1993), Bonnal, Fougère, and Sérandon (1997), Abbring, Van den Berg,
and Van Ours (1997), and Van den Berg, Van der Klaauw, and Van Ours (2004)
study the effect of a treatment of unemployed workers on the transition rate
from unemployment to work, allowing for a causal effect on the transition rate
as well as for related unobserved heterogeneity in order to deal with selectivity.
Lillard (1993) estimates a model for the joint durations of marriage and time
until conception of a child, and his model allows the rate at which the marriage
2

In Subsection 3.2 we justify this terminology.

1494

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

dissolves to shift to another level at moments of child birth. Lillard and Panis
(1996) estimate a model on the joint durations of marriage, nonmarriage, and
life, and their model allows the death rate to shift to another level at moments
of marriage formation and dissolution. These studies also allow for related
unobserved heterogeneity. Below we use the effect of a sudden unemployment
benefits reduction on the transition rate to work as an example.
We do not impose exclusion restrictions on covariates, i.e. we do not require
that the data contain a variable that affects the treatment assignment but does
not affect the outcome of interest other than by way of the treatment. A variable that is observed by the analyst is often also observable to the individuals
under consideration. If such a variable affects the treatment process, then a rational individual will take this variable into account in determining his optimal
strategy. This behavior affects the rate at which the individual leaves the state
of interest. As a result, exclusion restrictions are difficult to justify and instrumental variable methods of inference are not likely to be of help. A practical
issue is that the latter methods are often not tailored to our dynamic framework. One may be tempted to time-aggregate the treatment process into a
binary indicator for treatment in an interval and apply standard methods for
binary treatments. However, this way we would lose track of the parameters
of interest and throw away identifying information. Moreover, it is not clear
what to do when treatment and outcome occur in the same interval or when
observations are right-censored before the end of the interval.
We also avoid conditional-independence assumptions, which require that all
selectivity in the assignment of treatment can be controlled by conditioning on
observed covariates. In many econometric applications, there may be unobserved heterogeneity in treatment assignment and outcomes. By the argument
against instrumental variables assumptions above, any unobserved heterogeneity in treatment assignment is likely to imply unobserved selectivity and violations of conditional independence.
Finally, we show that multiple-spell data are similar to linear panel data in
the sense that the intuition for identification in linear panel-data models carries
over to our nonlinear models.
Section 2 develops the causal framework and the basic nonidentification result. Sections 3 and 4 derive the identification results for the single-spell and
multiple-spell cases, respectively. Section 5 concludes.
2. A FRAMEWORK FOR CAUSAL INFERENCE
2.1. A Potential Outcome Framework
Consider a population of individuals flowing into a state of interest and
the durations these individuals subsequently spend in that state. We are interested in the causal effect of a single binary treatment that is either assigned
at some time in R+ := [0 ∞) after entering the state or not assigned at all. We
can cast this problem in the standard potential outcome framework pioneered

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1495

by Neyman (1923) by recognizing that our dynamically assigned binary treatment can be reinterpreted as a set of mutually exclusive treatments indexed
by R+ := R+ ∪ {∞}. Here, the point ∞ represents the no-treatment case. To
each treatment s ∈ R+ corresponds a random variable Y ∗ (s) ≥ 0, the potential
outcome in the case that we would intervene and assign treatment s. Causal inference is concerned with contrasting potential outcomes corresponding to different treatments. Because the treatments are mutually exclusive, we can never
observe potential outcomes corresponding to different treatments simultaneously. In the words of Dawid (2000), potential outcomes are complementary.
This is what Holland (1986) calls the “fundamental problem of causal inference.” A solution is to impose sufficient structure on the model to allow for
causal inference from actual (experimental or observational) data. The inherently dynamic setting of our model and its application in economics call for a
separate discussion.
Unlike Neyman and much of the more recent literature (e.g. Rubin (1974),
Holland (1986), and Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith (1999)), we have to deal
with infinitely—actually uncountably—many potential outcome variables.3 For
a careful discussion, we explicitly introduce the probability space (Ω F  P) on
which all random variables are defined. {Y ∗ } := {Y ∗ (s); s ≥ 0}, which collects
all potential outcomes, is an R+ -valued stochastic process, which we require
to be measurable. Treatments are assigned according to an R+ -valued random
variable S. The actual outcome is Y := Y ∗ (S); all other potential outcomes are
counterfactual. Measurability of {Y ∗ } ensures that Y is a random variable (by
application of Billingsley (1995, Theorem 13.1)). We refer to the pair ({Y ∗ } S)
(or, rather, its distribution) as a causal model specification. A causal model is
a set of causal model specifications.
Now consider a sample of individuals i with i = 1 2  n, with potential
outcomes and treatments ({Yi∗ } Si ) that are distributed like ({Y ∗ } S) above.
We focus on inference of characteristics of the marginal distributions of Y ∗ (s),
like the means µ(s) := E[Y ∗ (s)]. For example, suppose that µ(s) < ∞ for
all s ∈ R+ and that we have been able to ensure randomized assignment, so
that {Y ∗ } ⊥⊥ S. Then µ(S) = E[Y |S] almost surely. So, under some additional
smoothness assumptions, we can estimate µ by standard nonparametric regression techniques.

3
Manski (1997), however, derives nontrivial bounds on the effects of continuous treatments
under the assumption of monotone (and bounded) responses. Gill and Robins (2001) extend
Robins’ earlier work on g-computation to continuous treatments under additional continuity
conditions. Also, structural models routinely allow for causal effects of continuous variables. See
Heckman (2000) for a review and Pearl (2000) for a discussion of the link between structural
models and potential outcome models.

1496

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

2.2. The Dynamic Causal Model and the Accumulation of Information
So far we have ignored the fact that our problem is inherently dynamic. To
facilitate an explicit discussion of dynamics, we assume that Y ∗ (s) is a continuous random variable, and we focus on its hazard rate, which is given almost
everywhere by
Pr(Y ∗ (s) ∈ [y y + dy)|Y ∗ (s) ≥ y)
dy↓0
dy

θY ∗ (s) (y) = lim

The
corresponding integrated hazards are denoted by ΘY ∗ (s) (y) :=
y
∗ (s) (u)du. We assume that ΘY ∗ (s) (y) < ∞ for all y ∈ R+ , and that
θ
Y
0
limy→∞ ΘY ∗ (s) (y) = ∞. The latter assumption entails that Pr(Y ∗ (s) < ∞) = 1,
which may be restrictive in certain applications. It is dropped in Section 3.
It is well known and easy to check that under these assumptions ΘY ∗ (s) (Y ∗ (s))
has a unit exponential distribution. This suggests the following approach towards a causal model. Explicitly including the sample point ω as an argument,
let
Y ∗ (s ω) = Θ−1
Y ∗ (s) (E(s ω))
with Θ−1
Y ∗ (s) (·) = inf{y ∈ R+ : ΘY ∗ (s) (y) ≥ ·} the generalized inverse of ΘY ∗ (s) and
E(s ·), s ∈ R+ , unit exponential random variables. Then, it is easy to derive
that Y ∗ (s ·) is indeed a continuous random variable with integrated hazard
ΘY ∗ (s) , for given s ∈ R+ .
We adopt the following corresponding causal interpretation. First, nature selects an ω according to the model (Ω F  P). Then we intervene and set s, and
thus ΘY ∗ (s) and E(s ·).4 Nature does not re-randomize after our intervention,
so ω is fixed throughout the experiment. As the distribution of E(s ·) is invariant to our choice of s, the potential integrated hazards ΘY ∗ (s) have a causal
interpretation. Note that this does not require invariance of the actual realization E(s ω). Indeed, we are not interested in the structure of E(s ·) beyond
distributional invariance.5 Having established this, it is unnecessary and cumbersome to use notation that explicates the dependence of E on s and to carry
along the argument ω. We can simply specify Y ∗ (s) := Θ−1
Y ∗ (s) (E), with E a unit
exponential random variable, and focus our analysis on ΘY ∗ (s) .6 If we have randomized assignment and observe the distribution of Y conditional on S, then
4
Note that this explicitly allows for randomness at the individual level like Freedman (2002)
and unlike, for example, Holland (1986).
5
The joint distributions of {Y ∗ } can only be determined if we make further assumptions on
the joint distributions of the process {E}. We would need these distributions to evaluate truly
counterfactual statements, notably those involving “causes of effects” (Dawid (2000)). Dawid
argues that any such assumptions are fundamentally untestable, except in the unlikely case that,
at least in principle, {E} can be fully determined by scientific inquiry.
6
Measurability of Y ∗ is ensured by requiring that (s e) → Θ−1
Y ∗ (s) (e) is measurable (again by
Billingsley (1995, Theorem 13.1)).

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1497

ΘY ∗ (s) can be estimated using standard hazard regression techniques (see, e.g.,
Fleming and Harrington (1991)).
We are now ready to discuss more substantive dynamic issues. Heuristically,
θY ∗ (s) (y)dy is the probability that the outcome spell ends in a small interval
[y y + dy), conditional on survival up to y and under treatment s. For each
treatment s ∈ R+ , introduce a dynamic treatment indicator {Ns (y); 0 ≤ y < ∞}
such that Ns (y) = 0 if y < s and Ns (y) = 1 if y ≥ s. Then, {NS } is a counting process that tracks the actual treatment status over time. An issue that is
central to a behavioral science like economics is the dynamic accumulation of
information concerning treatment by the individual. As a routine “consistency”
condition, biostatisticians typically impose that the outcomes up to some time
y only depend on the treatment history {Ns (u); 0 ≤ u < y}, for a given assigned
treatment s ∈ R+ (Robins (1998) and Lok (2001)). A weak version of this condition requires that hazard rates for any two treatments s t ∈ R+ coincide almost everywhere up to the first of the two treatments, min{s t}. This consistency condition seems natural, by simply requiring that cause precedes effect.
However, in social sciences, individuals may act on knowledge of the moment
of realization of a future treatment. In such cases, individuals are said to anticipate the treatment. We can therefore phrase our “consistency” condition as a
“no-anticipation” assumption.
ASSUMPTION 1 (No anticipation): For all s t ∈ R+ ,
ΘY ∗ (s) (y) = ΘY ∗ (t) (y) for all y ≤ min{s t}
Suppose that individuals are informed about the treatment time at the start
of the spell. If individuals act on this information and their actions affect outcomes, the potential hazards corresponding to different treatments will diverge
from time 0 onwards. Similar but subtler patterns arise if individuals dynamically accumulate treatment-specific information that strictly includes the actual
treatment history. An example is that the treatment time is revealed at some
fixed interval before the treatment time. If the econometrician only observes
the moment of the actual treatment, then in these cases the above assumption
is violated. Now one may argue that in such cases the real treatment (or, at
least, the first treatment) concerns the information shock rather than the actual exposure or participation, and that the real moment of treatment is the
moment at which the information about future actual exposure or participation arrives. Information shocks cannot be anticipated. This leads to a somewhat different interpretation of Assumption 1, namely that the econometrician
observes the real treatment.7
7
If we observe the timing of all information shocks we can use a multiple-treatment extension
of our model that is not hard to envision.

1498

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

It is important to stress that Assumption 1 does not exclude that forwardlooking individuals act on properties of the treatment process. It only requires
that such effects are the same between interventions manipulating the future
treatment status. In that sense, the potential outcome part of our model is
a model for contrasting treatments for a given information structure. It does
not allow us to contrast outcomes to outcomes in a world without treatment.
One of the contributions of this paper is to make these problems explicit in a
dynamic setting.8
2.3. A Basic Nonidentification Result
So far we have assumed that the econometrician always observes S and
therefore {NS }. However, in many applications treatment is irrelevant and/or
unobserved if it occurs after the spell of interest has ended. From now on,
we explicitly entertain the possibility that we only observe the treatment history {NS (y); 0 ≤ y < Y } realized at Y . Assume that S and {Y ∗ } are such that
Pr(Y = S) = 0 (see also Assumption 2 below). In this case, a large data set
would provide
QS (y s) := Pr(Y > y S > s Y > S) and
(1)

QY (y) := Pr(Y > y Y < S)

for all (y s) ∈ R2+ . These are the sub-survival-functions of (Y S) and Y for the
sub-populations with respectively Y > S and Y < S. So, we have the following
definition.
∗ } 
DEFINITION 1: Two causal model specifications ({Y ∗ } S) and ({Y
S) are




observationally equivalent if (QS  QY ) = (QS  QY ), where QS and QY are de := Y
∗ (
S) and 
S.
fined by (1) for Y
Note that the distribution of the identified minimum of (Y S), i.e. the smallest of Y and S joint with the identity of this smallest duration, is fully characterized by (QS0  QY ), with QS0 (s) = QS (−∞ s) for all s ∈ R+ (Tsiatis (1975)). We
will occasionally exploit that our models of (QS  QY ) embed competing risks
models for (QS0  QY ).
Now, first note that, under Assumption 1 and randomized assignment, ΘY ∗ (s)
can be identified from a standard hazard regression on the treatment history
alone. This does not require information on {NS (y); Y < y ≤ ∞}. We show in
the Appendix that any data pair (QS  QY ) can be supported by a causal model
8
Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith (1999) have addressed similar issues within the context of the
static binary-treatment potential outcome model. They differentiate between the no-treatment
outcome in a world with treatments and outcomes in a world without treatments.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1499

specification that satisfies Assumption 1 and randomized assignment.9 This implies the following proposition.
PROPOSITION 1: To each causal model specification ({Y ∗ } S) corresponds an
∗ } 
observationally equivalent specification ({Y
S) that satisfies Assumption 1 and
∗
 } ⊥⊥ 
S).
randomized assignment ({Y
Note that the “no-anticipation” assumption is made on the marginal distributions of {Y ∗ } whereas the “randomized-assignment” assumption is made on
the relation between S and {Y ∗ }. One reason for failure of randomized assignment can be that there are causal (in particular, anticipatory) effects of the
outcome on treatment assignment.
Proposition 1 provides two insights. First, without further structure, we cannot distinguish between causal effects and spurious selection effects. This is
the standard selection problem. Second, we cannot distinguish between potential outcome models with and without anticipation (as defined by Assumption 1). This problem also haunts other methods for inference of treatment
effects but is rarely mentioned. Anticipation is often tacitly ruled out. Subsection 2.4 illustrates Proposition 1 by way of an example. Except for that
subsection, we assume throughout the remainder of the paper that Assumption 1 is true, and we focus on separating causal and spurious effects. So, we
address the first nonidentification problem, but not the second. This requires
additional structure. We impose this by explicitly modelling selection effects
as related effects of vectors of observed covariates X and unobserved (to the
econometrician) covariates V on outcomes and assignment. To this end, de†
for each possible value
fine a continuously-distributed potential outcome Ysxv
†
(s x v) of (S X V ). Similarly, let Sxv be the random treatment time in the
case that we assign covariate values (x v). The processes {Y † } and {S † } again
have to be measurable. For definiteness, we assume that there are no causal effects of S and Y on (X V ). Consistency with the previous model setup requires
†
†
†
that Ys∗ = YsXV
and S = SXV
. The actual outcome is Y = YSXV
. We assume that
there is no anticipation: Assumption 1 holds for the integrated hazards of {Y † }
for all (x v) in the support of (X V ). In the sequel, it is understood that we
mean this slightly stronger assumption if we refer to Assumption 1.
Instead of randomized assignment we impose that all selection effects can
be captured by conditioning on (X V ):
ASSUMPTION 2: {Y † }⊥⊥ {S † }. The distribution of (YS††

xv xv

†
 Sxv
) is absolutely con-

tinuous with respect to Lebesgue measure on R2+ for all (x v) in the support of
(X V ).
9

Gill and Robins (2001) provide a related result for a different model.

1500

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

This is reminiscent of conditional-independence assumptions but also allows
for conditioning on unobserved covariates. The covariates (X V ) should include all joint determinants of outcomes and assignment, including any information that triggers relevant behavioral responses. Note that Assumption 2
excludes the trivial case where the covariates fully determine either the treatment or the outcome. Thus, after controlling for (X V ) there is always some
random variation left in both.
The restriction to time-invariant observed covariates is unnecessarily strong
for the exposition of the causal model and we could easily extend the analysis
to external time-varying covariates.10 However, in our identification analysis we
will only deal with time-invariant covariates, which is in line with most of the
literature on the identification of duration models (see Heckman and Taber
(1994), and Van den Berg (2001) for surveys). The main reason to restrict attention to time-invariant observed covariates in this literature and our paper is
expositional convenience. Results by Honoré (1991) and Heckman and Taber
(1994) suggest that identification often benefits from any additional variation
of the observed covariates over time. In this sense, our analysis provides a baseline that can be enriched by extensions to observed time-varying covariates.
It is more difficult to deal with time-varying unobserved covariates. We do
not deal with this except for the case where the covariate paths are common
within strata (see Section 4). We recognize that this imposes an important restriction on the model. After all, it is not hard to think of realistic examples with
time-varying unobserved covariates. It is a useful topic for further research to
study identification of models with such time-varying unobservables. In particular, instrumental variables (or, better, processes), if available, may enable
identification.
2.4. Example: The Effect of Time-varying Benefits on the
Unemployment Duration
In this subsection we illustrate the nonidentification result in Proposition 1
in the context of a specific economic-theoretical (job search) model framework. The treatment is a reduction of the benefits level of an unemployed individual at time S, and the outcome Y is the unemployment duration. In the
first model version, individuals have perfect foresight concerning the realization of S, whereas in the second model version they only know the stochastic
assignment rule. In other words, in the first version there is full anticipation
whereas in the second there is none. We demonstrate that the implied causal
models contain observationally equivalent causal model specifications. Note
that in both cases the researcher does not observe S unless it precedes Y .
10
See Kalbfleisch and Prentice (1980, Section 5.3), Heckman and Taber (1994), and Abbring
(2001, Section 3.2) for discussions of external covariates in survival analysis.

1501

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

Consider a standard partial search model describing an unemployed individual (e.g. Mortensen (1986)). Job offers arrive at a rate λ · e, where e ≥ 0 is the
intensity of search and λ > 0 is a structural parameter. The corresponding flow
of search costs equals 12 e2 . The wage offer distribution is degenerate at w. An
individual initially receives unemployment benefits equal to w while searching,
but these are reduced to b at time S. The individual maximizes her expected
lifetime income discounted at the rate ρ > 0. For expositional convenience we
impose that

2ρ + 1
(2)
λ=
2(w − b)
throughout this section.
In the first model version, the individual knows her value s of S from the
outset. From the Bellman equations for the expected present value it can be
deduced that

2ρ

if 0 ≤ y ≤ s and
(3)
θY ∗ (s) (y) = (2ρ + 1)eρ(s−y) − 1

1
if y > s.
For each given s, θY ∗ (s) increases on [0 s) and is continuous at s. To further
facilitate the exposition, we assume that assignment is randomized. We take
S to have the density g(s) ∝ (2ρ + 1 − e−ρs )2 e−s . Recall that the data can be
summarized by (QS  QY ). It can be shown that
QS (y s) =
(4)
QY (y) =

2(ρ + 1)(2ρ + 1)
(1 + max{0 y − s})e− max{ys}
4ρ2 + 10ρ + 5

and

4ρ + 3
e−y
4ρ2 + 10ρ + 5

In the second model version, we assume that the benefits reduction arrives
at a constant rate (i.e. that S is exponentially distributed) and that assignment
is again randomized. The arrival rate of the benefits reduction is known to
the individuals, but an individual does not know her realization s of S in advance. Apart from this, the second model version is the same as the first model
version. In particular, the wage and initial benefits level w and the reduced
benefits level b are the same. We also use identical specifications of search
technologies and preferences, but we allow the discount rate ρ and the searchtechnology parameter λ to be different between the model versions. We make
this explicit by using ρ and λ for the first model version only and by denoting the corresponding parameters in the second model version by ρ̃ and λ̃,
respectively. The restriction in (2) is imposed on both sets of parameters. Note
that our intervention involves a manipulation of s without changing the hazard

1502

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

rate of S. From the Bellman equations it can be deduced that the hazard rate
θY ∗ (s) (y) is constant at some level below 1 before s and equals 1 after s.
For given w, b, and ρ, we can tailor the parameters of the second model
version so that it implies the data (QS  QY ) in (4). In particular, let the arrival
rate of the benefits reduction in the second model version be 2(ρ + 1)(2ρ +
1)/(4ρ2 + 10ρ + 5). Then, for sufficiently large ρ we can pick a discount rate
0 < ρ̃ < ρ such that the second model version is observationally equivalent to
the first.11 For example, if w = 1, b = 12 , and ρ = 5%, then λ = 1 049 by (2) in
the first model version. An observationally equivalent model version without
anticipation follows if we choose a constant rate 0 419 of benefits reductions
and a discount rate ρ̃ = 1 23%. In this model version, the hazard rate θY ∗ (s) (y)
jumps from 0 581 to 1 at s. By (2), λ̃ = 1 012.
3. SINGLE-SPELL DATA
3.1. Model Framework
Single-spell data ideally provide the joint distribution of (Y {NS (y); 0 ≤ y <
Y }), conditional on observed covariates X. In obvious notation, suppose the
data come in the form of a collection {QS  QY } := {(QS (·|x) QY (·|x)); x ∈ X }
of conditional sub-survival functions. Here, X ⊂ Rk , 1 ≤ k < ∞, is the support of X. The results of Subsection 2.3 (applied for given values of X) imply that Assumptions 1 and 2 are not sufficient to identify the causal model
from {QS  QY }. In this section, we show that the model is identified under additional separability (proportionality) assumptions. For ease of exposition we
omit counterfactual indicators in the notation.
Assumption 2 implies that any dependence between Y and S conditional on
(X V ) stems from causal effects of S on Y . Unobserved selection effects are
fully captured by the unobserved covariates V . So, it is convenient to specify
11
To provide some intuition, note that θY ∗ (s) (y) at y < s cannot be identified from data with
S = s, because data on S are unavailable if Y < S. At the very best one can pin down the mixture
hazard rate
 ∞
 ∞
θY ∗ (s) (y)e−ΘY ∗ (s) (y) g(s)ds
e−ΘY ∗ (s) (y) g(s)ds
y

y

over the potential hazards corresponding to treatments s in [y ∞). In both model versions this
hazard rate equals
Pr(y ≤ Y < y + dy|Y ≥ y S ≥ y)
−QY (y)
4ρ + 3
≡ 0
=
dy↓0
dy
QS (y) + QY (y) 4ρ2 + 10ρ + 5
lim

if we set ρ̃ equal to
32ρ4 + 96ρ3 + 88ρ2 + 24ρ − 1
2(4ρ + 3)(4ρ2 + 10ρ + 5)
This last expression is positive if ρ > − 34 +

1
4

√
√
3 + 14 2 ≈ 0 037.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1503

the model as a mixture of the joint distribution of (Y S)|(X V ) over the distribution of V |X. In turn, the joint distribution of (Y S)|(X V ) is the product
of the distributions of Y |(S X V ) and S|(X V ). So, {QS  QY } is fully specified
by the following.
MODEL 1A: The hazard rates of Y |(S X = x V ) and S|(X = x V ) are given
by
(5)

θY (t|S x V ) =

λY (t)φY (x)VY
λY (t)φY (x)δ(t|S x)VY

if t ≤ S,
if t > S,

and
(6)

θS (t|x V ) = λS (t)φS (x)VS 

respectively. V is an R2+ -valued random vector (VY  VS ) distributed with distribution G independent of x. The following regularity conditions and normalizations
hold.
(i) φY and φS are continuous functions φS : X → (0 ∞) and φY : X →
(0 ∞) such that φY (x∗ ) = φS (x∗ ) = 1 for some a priori chosen x∗ ∈ X .
(ii) The functions λY : R+ → (0 ∞) and λS : R+ → (0 ∞) have integrals
 t
 t
ΛY (t) :=
λY (τ)dτ < ∞ and ΛS (t) :=
λS (τ)dτ < ∞
0

0
∗

for all t ∈ R+ . For some a priori chosen t ∈ (0 ∞), ΛY (t ∗ ) = ΛS (t ∗ ) = 1.
(iii) G is such that Pr(V ∈ (0 ∞)2 ) > 0.
(iv) δ : R2+ × X → (0 ∞) is such that


t

δ(τ|s x)dτ < ∞ and

∆(t|s x) :=
s



t

λY (τ)δ(τ|s x)dτ < ∞

Υ (t|s x) :=
s

exist and are continuous on {(t s) ∈ R2+ : t > s} × X .
Equations (5) and (6) have mixed proportional hazard (MPH) specifications,
except for the factor involving δ. An assumption implicit in equation (5) is that
Y ⊥⊥ VS |(S X VY ). Similarly, equation (6) embodies the assumption that S ⊥⊥
VY |(X VS ). One could say that VY captures the “unobserved heterogeneity” or
“frailty” in Y and VS captures the unobserved determinants of S.12 In applied
12
Here, VY and VS are not necessarily interpreted as unobserved covariates (as in Subsection 2.3) but rather as their (proportional) effects on the conditional hazards.

1504

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

duration analysis, it is common to specify φi (x) = exp(x βi ), so that the hazard
function is multiplicative in all separate elements of x. Note that we allow the
elements in X to be discrete and/or continuous.
Conditional on (X V ), the variables Y and S are only dependent through
δ(t|S X). Thus, by Assumption 2, this factor can be given a causal interpretation as the “treatment effect” of S on Y . Note that δ(t|s x) only enters
θY (t|S x V ) at durations t > S. So, Model 1a satisfies Assumption 1.13 If δ = 1,
treatment is ineffective. On the other hand, suppose that δ equals some constant larger than one. When S is realized, θY increases by (δ − 1) · 100%. This
stochastically reduces the remaining outcome duration in comparison to the
case where the treatment is given at a later point of time. More generally,
Model 1a allows the treatment effect to depend on elapsed duration t, the
treatment time S, and the observed covariates X. By implication, it may vary
with the time t − S since treatment. If the treatment itself takes some time, the
effect of t − S may for instance capture a low exit rate during treatment. In
Subsection 3.3, we discuss an alternative model that allows δ to depend on a
third unobserved component but not on the treatment time.
The functions λY and λS are called the “baseline hazards.” The corresponding hazard rates are said to be duration dependent if the functions λY and
λS are nontrivial. The functions ΛY , ΛS , and Υ appear naturally whenever
we integrate the hazard rates over their first (duration) argument. We do not
require that limt→∞ ΛY (t) = ∞, limt→∞ ΛS (t) = ∞, or limt→∞ Υ (t|s x) = ∞.
This means we allow for Pr(Y = ∞) > 0 and Pr(S = ∞) > 0, which is important in many applications. Also, we allow VY and VS to have mass points at 0,
which entails that some subjects have a hazard rate θY (t|S x V ) identically
equal to zero and/or θS (t|x V ) ≡ 0. In the latter case, a mass of individuals
never receives treatment. Note that we allow for two sources of defectiveness
(see Abbring (2002) for discussion).14
3.2. Identification
The components of Model 1a that can be freely varied are ΛY , ΛS , φY , φS ,
∆, and G (we take the support X of X as given). If we specify each of these
components, we have fully pinned down the data {QS  QY }. Our identification
analysis is nonparametric in the sense that we allow each of the model components to vary in infinite-dimensional function spaces, restricted by the regularity conditions of Subsection 3.1 and some additional assumptions. Let M be
13
This also ensures that the stochastic process Pr(Y ≤ t|S X V ) is measurable with respect to
σ({NS (s); 0 ≤ s < t} X V ) and Pr(Y ≤ t|S X V ) = Pr(Y ≤ t|{NS (s); 0 ≤ s < t} X V ). We may
therefore apply the conventional exponential representation of the survivor function (Fleming
and Harrington (1991)).
14
Model 1a and the analysis below can be straightforwardly extended with causal effects of the
outcome on the treatment, introducing the mirror image of δ in equation (6). In applications of
this, one typically observes not only {QS  QY }, but the full joint distribution of (Y S)|X. This is
needed to identify causal effects in both directions.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1505

the collection of all (ΛY  ΛS  φY  φS  ∆ G) that are admissible under a given
set of assumptions. We simply refer to M as the “model” (under a given set
of assumptions and for a given structure as in Model 1a) and to each M ∈ M
as a “specification” of the model. Each specification M ∈ M maps into exactly
one data collection {QS  QY }. By analogy to Definition 1, two specifications
 ∈ M are said to be observationally equivalent if the corresponding data
M M
S  Q
Y } are equal. Thus, we have the following definition.
{QS  QY } and {Q
DEFINITION 2: A model M is identified (from {QS  QY }) if observational
 ∈ M implies that M = M.

equivalence of any two specifications M M
If M is identified, then we also say that the components ΛY , et cetera, are
identified.
Recall that, in the case of Model 1a, ∆ is only defined, and only needs to
be identified, on {(t s) ∈ R2+ : t > s} × X . Once we know ∆, we can identify
δ(t|s x) for almost all t > s, for all s ∈ R+ and x ∈ X . This covers the relevant
area, as δ(t|s x) only enters the model through the factor δ(t|S x)NS (t−) . Also
note that concerning the effects of x we focus on nonparametric identification
of the maps φY and φS . In practice, one may start off with a parametric specification of, for example, φY and require that all parameters can be recovered
from its graph {(x φY (x)); x ∈ X }. In the case where φY (x) is log-linear in
x βi , this requires that X is not contained in a proper linear subspace of the
k-dimensional Euclidian space Rk .
Now, consider the following assumptions.
ASSUMPTION 3: {(φY (x) φS (x)); x ∈ X } contains a nonempty open set in R2 .
ASSUMPTION 4: E[VY ] < ∞ and E[VS ] < ∞.
Note that Assumption 3 does not impose exclusion restrictions on the structural components of the hazards, but does require independent variation in
these components. If k = 2, φY (x) = exp(x βY ), and φS (x) = exp(x βS ) for
some βY and βS such that (βY βS ) has full rank, then it is sufficient that X
contains a nonempty open set in R2 . Assumption 4 is a common assumption in
the analysis of single-spell duration data with MPH-type models (e.g. Elbers
and Ridder (1982)).
The identification analysis in this section exploits that Model 1a embeds a
competing risks model for the distribution {QS0  QY } of the identified minimum.
This embedded model is a standard MPH competing risks model that does
not involve the treatment effect δ. Conditional on the observed covariates X,
the competing risks are only dependent through the unobserved covariates V .
Heckman and Honoré (1989) study the identifiability of similar competing risk
models. Here, we rely on the following result of Abbring and Van den Berg
(2003).

1506

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

PROPOSITION 2: Under Assumptions 3 and 4, ΛY , ΛS , φY , φS , and G in
Model 1a are identified from {QS0  QY }.
This leads to the main result.
PROPOSITION 3: Under Assumptions 3 and 4, ΛY , ΛS , φY , φS , ∆, and G in
Model 1a are identified from {QS  QY }.
The proof of this proposition provides some intuition on what drives the
identification of the treatment effect. Consider individuals who receive a treatment at s. The natural control group consists of individuals whose spells have
not ended at s and who have not yet received a treatment. A necessary condition for a meaningful comparison of these groups is that there is some randomization in the treatment assignment at s. The model allows for such randomization because we specify assignment by way of the hazard rate of S. The
S
integrated hazard rate 0 θS (τ|x V )dτ has a unit exponential distribution independently of (x V ) (see, e.g., Ridder (1990) and Horowitz (1999)). Thus,
there is a random component in the assignment that is independent of (x V ).
This component affects Y only by way of the treatment.15 However, the presence of this component is not sufficient for a meaningful comparison. We still
have to deal with a selection effect: the unobserved heterogeneity distribution
is different between the treatment and control groups at s. This can be corrected by exploiting the information in the competing risks part of the data.
The competing risks part of the model determines the distribution of VY in the
two groups at s and the competing risks part of the data enables the identification of this.
The results in our companion paper, Abbring and Van den Berg (2002b),
provide some additional intuition for the case of a constant treatment effect δ.
We show that single-spell data are informative on the sign of ln(δ) even if
there is no variation in X. If treatment and outcome are typically realized very
quickly after each other, no matter how long the elapsed duration in the state
of interest before the treatment, then this is evidence of a positive causal treatment effect. The selection effect does not give rise to the same type of quick
succession of events. If there is no such pattern but yet there is a correlation
between the points in time of treatment and outcome, then this is evidence
of a dominating selection effect. Somewhat loosely, local dependence indicates a causal effect whereas global dependence indicates a selection effect.
15
It is tempting to interpret this random component in terms of the randomness of the outcome
of S at t that remains if the hazard rate θS (t|x V ) at t is specified. Consider an individual who
has not yet been given a treatment and whose spell has not yet ended, at t. Basically, in a small
time interval [t t + dt), the probability of treatment is θS (t|x V )dt, and the probability of no
treatment is 1−θS (t|x V )dt. This is a Bernoulli trial. Given the value of θS (t|x V )dt, its outcome
is completely random.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1507

This is not surprising given that the treatment only works after it has been realized, whereas the unobserved heterogeneity values affect the hazard rates
everywhere. This illustrates the usefulness of the information on the timing of
events to assess treatment effects. There is a similarity to the identification
of MPH models with exogenous time-varying explanatory variables (Honoré
(1991)).
Further evidence is provided by a comparison to the identification of the
treatment effect in standard latent variable models with a regression specification for the outcome of interest, a binary treatment indicator, and a regression
specification for a corresponding latent variable (Abbring and Van den Berg
(2002a)). By analogy to Ridder (1990) and Horowitz (1999), the distributions
of Y |(S X V ) and S|(X V ) in our Model 1a can be written in a regression
form. The most fundamental difference between our model and latent variable models concerns the fact that the former incorporates the timing of the
treatment whereas the latter do not. It is generally acknowledged that an exclusion restriction is required for identification of the treatment-effect parameter
in latent variable models. Since we do not need exclusion restrictions to identify our model, it follows that the information on the timing of treatment is very
useful.
3.3. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
Model 1a excludes unobserved heterogeneity in the treatment effect. Recent
contributions to the literature on treatment evaluation are often concerned
with treatment effects that may depend on unobservables (see, e.g., Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith (1999) for a survey). The following model allows
δ to depend on unobservables, but, unlike Model 1a, excludes variation of δ
with S.
MODEL 1B: The hazard rates of Y |(S X = x V ) and S|(X = x V ) are given
by
(7)

θY (t|S x V ) =

λY (t)φY (x)VY
λ∆ (t)φ∆ (x)V∆

if t ≤ S,
if t > S,

and
(8)

θS (t|x V ) = λS (t)φS (x)VS 

respectively. V is now a R3+ -valued random vector (VY  V∆  VS ) distributed with
distribution G∆ independent of x. The relevant regularity conditions and normalizations of Model 1a hold and:
(i) φ∆ : X → (0 ∞) is a continuous function such that φ∆ (x∗ ) = 1 for some
a priori chosen x∗ ∈ X ;

1508

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

(ii) the function λ∆ : R+ → (0 ∞) has an integral

Λ∆ (t) :=

t

λ∆ (τ)dτ < ∞
0

for all t ∈ R+ ; for some a priori chosen t ∗ ∈ (0 ∞), Λ∆ (t ∗ ) = 1;
(iii) G∆ is such that Pr(V ∈ (0 ∞)3 ) > 0.
The treatment effect,
δ(t|x VY  V∆ ) :=

λ∆ (t)φ∆ (x)V∆

λY (t)φY (x)VY

indeed depends on unobservables, but not on S. Note that δ is only welldefined for VY > 0 here. We could use the point ∞ to represent the case VY = 0
but, instead, we focus directly on identification of λY , λ∆ , φY , φ∆ , and G∆ .
First, note that Model 1b embeds the same MPH competing risks model
as Model 1a, so that Proposition 2 again applies. We need some additional
assumptions.
ASSUMPTION 5: {φ∆ (x); x ∈ X } contains a nonempty open interval in R.
ASSUMPTION 6: E[V∆ VS ] < ∞.
These new assumptions are simply standard MPH assumptions (e.g. Elbers
and Ridder (1982)) on the embedded model for (Y − S)|(S Y > S X = x V ).
After all, this is a MPH model with hazard λ∆ (y)φ∆ (x)V∆ at time y − S
(since S). The finite-mean Assumption 6 applies to V∆ VS rather than V∆ because of the conditioning on S.
PROPOSITION 4: Under Assumptions 3–6, ΛY , Λ∆ , ΛS , φY , φ∆ , φS , and G∆ in
Model 1b are identified from {QY  QS }.
The results in this section require separability assumptions, independence of
X and V , sufficient variation in the observed covariates, and finiteness of the
means of V . Although it is common to make such assumptions in applied duration analysis, they are sometimes hard to justify (see, for example, Van den
Berg (2001)). To deal with this, we extend our analysis in two directions. In the
next subsection we show that observed covariates, and most of the assumptions
above, are not needed for identification if we have multiple-spell data. In Abbring and Van den Berg (2002b) we show that single spells are informative on
aspects of δ and G even if there is no variation in X.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1509

4. IDENTIFICATION IN THE CASE OF MULTIPLE-SPELL DATA
4.1. Multiple-spell Data
In this section, we study identification from data that cover multiple outcome
and treatment spells for each individual. We focus on the case in which the data
provide information on the distribution of two full spells over the population of
individuals. The extension to more than two spells is trivial. Actually, the use of
the term “individual” is not very appropriate here, because the setup includes
cases in which physically different individuals share the same value of V and
we observe one duration for each of these individuals. It is convenient to refer
to either such a group of individuals or a single individual for which we have
multiple spells as a stratum. For each stratum, we observe a random draw from
the joint distribution of (Y1  {NS1 (y); 0 ≤ y < Y1 } Y2  {NS2 (y); 0 ≤ y < Y2 }).
We add subscripts 1 and 2 to random variables and functions corresponding to
respectively spell 1 and 2 in a stratum. So, Y1 is the outcome duration in the
first spell, Y2 the outcome duration in the second spell in a stratum, et cetera.
By analogy to (1), the multiple-spell data distribution can be characterized by
QSS (y1  y2  s1  s2 ) := Pr(Y1 > y1  Y2 > y2 
QY S (y1  y2  s2 ) := Pr(Y1 > y1  Y2 > y2 
QSY (y1  y2  s1 ) := Pr(Y1 > y1  Y2 > y2 
and
:= Pr(Y1 > y1  Y2 > y2 
QY Y (y1  y2 )

S1 > s1  S2 > s2 
S2 > s2 
S1 > s1 

Y1 > S1  Y2 > S2 )
S1 > Y1  Y2 > S2 )
Y1 > S1  S2 > Y2 )
S1 > Y1  S2 > Y2 )

for all (y1  y2  s1  s2 ) ∈ R4+ . Throughout this section we suppress observed covariates. The identification results do not require variation in observed covariates. Moreover, the model allows for full interaction of such covariates with
all other determinants. All results can be interpreted as being conditional on
observed covariates.
As with linear panel data, the fact that we observe multiple outcomes for
given unobserved heterogeneity values can be exploited to deal with unobserved heterogeneity under conditions that are mild relative to the singlespell (i.e. cross-sectional) case. Intuitively, we need some separability of the
outcome hazards, in treatment effect and unobserved covariate components.
Then, if the unobserved components are constant between spells in a stratum,
variation between spells and within strata can be used to control for selection
effects and identify the treatment effects.
In the next subsection, we study the multiple-spell analogues of Models 1a
and 1b. These models allow for different baseline hazards and treatment effects between spells within a stratum, but have multiplicative unobserved heterogeneity in the hazards. In the vein of the literature on identification of
multiple-spell duration models (Honoré (1993)), we explore identifiability of
fully specified bivariate models. In Subsection 4.3, we focus on identification

1510

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

of the treatment effect in models that only specify the conditional distribution
of the outcome spells. Stratified partial likelihood (SPL) arguments are applied to prove identification of the treatment effects in a model that allows for
interactions between duration effects and unobserved heterogeneity.
4.2. Identification of the Full Model
Consider the following multiple-spell analogues of Models 1a and 1b:
MODEL 2A: Multiple spells within a stratum are only dependent through the
covariates V , i.e. (Y1  S1 ) ⊥⊥ (Y2  S2 )|V . The hazard rates of Yk |(Sk  V ) and Sk |V
are
θYk (t|Sk  V ) =

λYk (t)VY
λYk (t)δk (t|Sk )VY

if t ≤ Sk ,
if t > Sk ,

θSk (t|V ) = λSk (t)VS

and
(k = 1 2)

respectively. V := (VY  VS ) has distribution G. Regularity conditions as in Model 1a
apply. For some a priori chosen t ∗ ∈ (0 ∞), ΛY1 (t ∗ ) = ΛS1 (t ∗ ) = 1 (in obvious
notation).
MODEL 2B: Same as Model 2a except that
θYk (t|Sk  V ) =

λYk (t)VY
λ∆k (t)V∆

if t ≤ Sk ,
if t > Sk ,

(k = 1 2)

and V := (VY  V∆  VS ) has distribution G∆ . For some a priori chosen t ∗ ∈ (0 ∞),
Λ∆1 (t ∗ ) = 1.
The first line excludes any causal effects across different spells within a
stratum. Outcomes and treatments may be related between spells, but only
through common unobservable components. The normalizations are innocuous because the unobserved covariates can capture the scale of first-period hazards. In both models, the same unobservables enter the first and second period
hazards multiplicatively. This suggests that we can exploit the panel structure
of the data, even though the baseline hazards and treatment effects are not
specified to be the same in the first and second spell of a stratum. Indeed, we
have the following result.
PROPOSITION 5: ΛY1 , ΛY2 , ΛS1 , ΛS2 and, respectively, ∆1 , ∆2 , and G in
Model 2a and Λ∆1 , Λ∆2 , and G∆ in Model 2b are identified from (QSS  QY S 
QSY  QY Y ).
The proof exploits that both models embed a two-spell version of the competing risks model with hazards that are proportional in V and t. Abbring and

1511

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

Van den Berg (2003) show that ΛY1 , ΛY2 , ΛS1 , and ΛS2 (but not G) in Model 2a
or 2b are identified. Unlike the single-spell case, we do not invoke a competing
risks result that also provides identification of G. This would impose additional
conditions on the model that we can circumvent here by exploiting the additional (non-competing-risk) information in (QSS  QY S  QSY  QY Y ).
Note that we do not need finite E[V ]. Also, recall that we implicitly allow
observed covariates X to enter the model in a general way. We could add X as
an argument to each of the model components in Models 2a and 2b and allow
V and X to be dependent. The gain (in terms of identification) from using
multiple-spell data is similar to the gain from using such data for MPH models
without treatment effects (Honoré (1993)).
4.3. Identification and Estimation from a Stratified Partial Likelihood
The results in the previous subsection show that multiple-spell data allow for
robust inference on the treatment effects under the assumption of proportional
unobserved heterogeneity common within strata. In panel regression models
with individual-specific effects, a “within estimator” can be used to estimate the
regression parameters. This analogy suggests an analysis of the multiple-spell
model of Y |(S V ) only, i.e. without specifying the marginal distribution of
(S V ). In this subsection, we analyze identification of treatment effects in such
a conditional model. The analysis is based on a Cox (1972) partial likelihood
for stratified data.16
First, we adapt the notation. The SPL method allows for general interactions
between time and unobserved covariates. Therefore, we replace VY by a (for
now) stochastic process {VY }. It is implicitly understood that {VY } replaces VY
in V . We have the following model.
MODEL 2C: Multiple outcome spells within a stratum are only dependent
through the covariates V and related treatments S1 and S2 , i.e. Y1 ⊥⊥ (Y2  S2 )|
(S1  V ) and Y2 ⊥⊥ (Y1  S1 )|(S2  V ). The hazard rate of Yk |(Sk  V ) is
θYk (t|Sk  V ) =

λYk (t)VY (t)
if t ≤ Sk ,
λYk (t)δk (t|Sk )VY (t) if t > Sk ,

(k = 1 2)

Regularity conditions as in Model 1a apply. In particular λYk (·)VY (·) is (pathwise)
integrable on bounded intervals. We normalize λY1 = 1.
16

The analysis of a partial likelihood for stratified data was pioneered by Holt and Prentice
(1974). See Ridder and Tunalı (1999) for an econometric SPL application with ample attention
for practical problems like censoring. In medical science, SPL methods have been applied in a
similar context in so-called “co-twin control” analyses of mortality (see Lichtenstein, Gatz, and
Berg (1998)).

1512

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

The unobserved heterogeneity {VY } only enters hazard rates at t through its
current value VY (t). It is crucial that {VY } is the same between the spells in
a stratum. The spell-specific baseline hazards λY1 and λY2 allow for different
duration dependence patterns between the spells. The normalization λY1 = 1
is innocuous, as {VY } can absorb the duration dependence and scale of θY1 .
Let Y(1) := min{Y1  Y2 } be given. Intuitively, the probability that, say, the
first spell in the stratum is the shortest, i.e. Y1 = Y(1) , does not depend on the
factor {VY } that is common between the spells in the stratum. It only depends
on the duration dependence factor λY2 and the treatment effects, which may
be different between the spells if the treatment histories {NS1 (τ); 0 ≤ τ < Y(1) }
and {NS2 (τ); 0 ≤ τ < Y(1) } are. Formally,
(9)

Pr(Y1 = Y(1) |Y(1)  {NS1 (τ); 0 ≤ τ < Y(1) } {NS2 (τ); 0 ≤ τ < Y(1) } V )
δ1 (Y(1) |S1 )NS1 (Y(1) −)
δ1 (Y(1) |S1 )NS1 (Y(1) −) + λY2 (Y(1) )δ2 (Y(1) |S2 )NS2 (Y(1) −)

1


if S1  S2 > Y(1) ,



1 + λY2 (Y(1) )




δ1 (Y(1) |S1 )


if S1 < Y(1) < S2 ,

 δ (Y |S ) + λ (Y )
1
(1) 1
Y2
(1)
=
1



if S1 > Y(1) > S2 ,


1
+
λ
(Y

Y2
(1) )δ2 (Y(1) |S2 )




δ1 (Y(1) |S1 )


if S1  S2 < Y(1) .

δ1 (Y(1) |S1 ) + λY2 (Y(1) )δ2 (Y(1) |S2 )

=

The right-hand side does not depend on V . Indeed, the only unknown components are the second-period baseline hazard, which captures the durationdependence difference between spells, and the treatment effects. For the first
sub-population of strata in (9), with S1  S2 > Y(1) , the only reason the spells
may not be equally likely to be the shortest is a difference in the baselines
at Y(1) . Treatment effects are irrelevant because in both spells treatment has
not started at time Y(1) . The second and third sub-populations are directly informative on the treatment effects as the treatment status of the spells at Y(1)
is different. Finally, the strata in which S1  S2 < Y(1) provide some more diffuse
information on the parameters because the treatment effect enters for both
spells.
Because V does not enter the right-hand side of (9), the same expression
is valid for Pr(Y1 = Y(1) |Y(1)  {NS1 (τ); 0 ≤ τ < Y(1) } {NS2 (τ); 0 ≤ τ < Y(1) }),
which follows from data. So, we can first identify ΛY2 from data on the first
sub-population of strata and then ∆1 and ∆2 from the second and third subpopulations, respectively. So, we have the following result.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1513

PROPOSITION 6: ΛY2 , ∆1 , and ∆2 in Model 2c are identified from (QSS  QY S 
QSY  QY Y ).
Equation (9) has obvious implications for estimation.
5. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have analyzed the effect of a dynamically assigned binary
treatment on a duration outcome. At the core of our analysis is a basic nonidentification result: (i) no anticipation and (ii) randomized treatment assignment
can be imposed without restricting the observational data. Throughout the paper, we have taken the no-anticipation assumption to be fundamental. Cases
in which agents are provided with and act on information on future treatments
can be handled in a multiple-treatment extension of our framework in which
both the actual treatment and information shocks are modelled as treatments.
The paper thus focuses on identifiability of the effects of a single binary
treatment under the no-anticipation assumption, but allowing for general unobserved selectivity in the assignment process. We show that, under some separability assumptions, the (possibly heterogeneous) treatment effect is identified from single-spell data without the need to rely on exclusion restrictions,
conditional independence, parametric functional-form assumptions, or multiple observations on the same individual. These results show that the timing of
events conveys useful information on the treatment effect. In a companion paper (Abbring and Van den Berg (2002b)), we develop simple procedures for
assessing the direction of the treatment effect that exploit this idea.
With multiple-spell data, the model is identified under even weaker conditions. In particular, we do not need some of the separability assumptions that
are important for identifiability with single-spell data.
Dept. of Economics, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands; jabbring@feweb.vu.nl; http://staff.feweb.vu.nl/jabbring
and
Dept. of Economics, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands; gberg@feweb.vu.nl; http://staff.feweb.vu.nl/gberg.
Manuscript received April, 2000; final revision received February, 2003.
APPENDIX
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1: Take some (Y S) and the corresponding (QS  QY ) as given. By
Miller (1977, Theorem 1), there exists a (Y  S) such that S ⊥
⊥ Y , Q0S = Q0S , and QY = QY . (This
theorem extends the nonidentification results by Cox (1959, 1962) and Tsiatis (1975) for continuous competing risks models to general mixed discrete-continuous models.) Let
ΘY∗ (s) (y) :=

ΘY (y)
ΘY (s) − ln[Pr(Y > y|Y > s S = s)]

if 0 ≤ y ≤ s,
if y > s.

1514

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

∗ (s) = Θ−1
Let E be a unit exponential random variable such that E ⊥
⊥ S. Set 
S = S, Y
∗ (s) (E) for all
Y
∗
∗
∗

=Y
 (S). Clearly, {Y
 } satisfies Assumption 1 and {Y
 }⊥
s ∈ R+ and Y
⊥
S. Direct computations
∗ } 
confirm that ({Y
S) is observationally equivalent to ({Y ∗ } S). In particular, it is easy to check
0 = Q0 , so that Q
Y = QY and Q
0 = Q0 by construction.
Y = QY and Q
Q.E.D.
that Q
S
S
S
S
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3: By Proposition 2, ΛY , ΛS , φY , φS , and G are identified from
{Q0S  QY }. For fixed x ∈ X ,
(10)

∂QS (y s|x)
= φS (x)λS (s)L(S)
G (φY (x)[ΛY (s) + Υ (y|s x)] φS (x)ΛS (s))
∂s

for all y ∈ R+ and almost all s ∈ R+ such that s < y. LG is the bivariate Laplace transform of G,
 ∞ ∞
LG (z1  z2 ) :=
exp(−z1 vY − z2 vS )dG(vY  vS )
0

0

2
and L(S)
G (z1  z2 ) := ∂LG (z1  z2 )/∂z2 for all (z1  z2 ) ∈ (0 ∞) . For given s and x, the right-hand
side of (10) is a strictly increasing and identified function of Υ (y|s x). This identifies Υ (y|s x)
and therefore
 y
∂Υ (τ|s x)/∂τ
dτ
∆(y|s x) =
λY (τ)
s

for all x ∈ X and all y s ∈ R+ such that s < y (using continuity).

Q.E.D.

PROOF OF PROPOSITION 4: By Proposition 2, ΛY , ΛS , φY , and φS are identified from
{Q0S  QY }. For fixed x ∈ X , ∂2 QS (y s|x)/∂y∂s and ∂2 QS (y s|x∗ )/∂y∂s exist for almost all y s ∈ R+
such that s < y. For these (y s)
(11)

∂2 QS (y s|x)/∂y∂s
∂2 QS (y s|x∗ )∂y∂s
(∆S)

= φS (x)φ∆ (x)

LG∆ (φY (x)ΛY (s) φ∆ (x)(Λ∆ (y) − Λ∆ (s)) φS (x)ΛS (s))
(∆S)

LG∆ (ΛY (s) Λ∆ (y) − Λ∆ (s) ΛS (s))

(∆S)
LG∆ is the trivariate Laplace transform of the distribution G∆ of (VY  V∆  VS ) and LG∆ (z1  z2  z3 )
:= ∂2 LG∆ (z1  z2  z3 )/∂z2 ∂z3 for all (z1  z2  z3 ) ∈ (0 ∞)3 . Letting y ↓ 0 and s ↓ 0, both sides of (11)
above reduce to φS (x)φ∆ (x) because E[V∆ VS ] = limz↓(000) L(∆S)
G∆ (z) < ∞. As we have identified
φS and the left-hand side consists of data, this identifies φ∆ .
Again for arbitrary x ∈ X and y s ∈ R+ such that s < y,

(12)

∂QS (y s|x)/∂s
= L(S)
G∆ (φY (x)ΛY (s) φ∆ (x) Λ∆ (y) − Λ∆ (s)) φS (x)ΛS (s) 
λS (s)φS (x)

with L(S)
G∆ (z1  z2  z3 ) := ∂LG∆ (z1  z2  z3 )/∂z3 . Note that the left-hand side of this equation is already identified. As s ↓ 0, the right-hand side reduces to
(13)

(S)

LG∆ (0 φ∆ (x)Λ∆ (y) 0)

After imposing y = t ∗ , we can identify the completely monotone function −L(S)
G∆ (0 · 0) on a
nonempty open set in R by appropriately varying x in (13). This identifies −L(S)
(0
z 0) for all z ∈
G∆
(S)
(0 ∞) because of the real analyticity of −LG∆ (0 · 0) (see below). Subsequently, Λ∆ is identified
from (13), because the right-hand side is strictly monotone in Λ∆ .
Finally, by appropriately varying x and y in equation (12), we can trace L(S)
G∆ on a nonempty
(S)
3
open subset of R3 . This identifies L(S)
on
(0
∞)
because
−
L
is
real
analytic.
A proof of these
G∆
G∆

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1515

statements is in a 2000 working paper version of this paper and is available upon request. With
LG∆ (0 0 0) = 1, this identifies LG∆ .
Q.E.D.
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 5: By Abbring and Van den Berg (2003), ΛY1 , ΛS1 , ΛY2 , and ΛS2 are
identified.
y
(i) For Model 2a, define Υk (y|s) := s λYk (τ)δk (τ|s)dτ, k = 1 2. Note that
−1 −1
 t ∗  y 2
∂ [QSY (τ t s) + QSS (τ t s t)]/∂τ∂s
ΛY2 (t ∗ )
dt
= Υ1 (y|s)
dτ
∂2 QSY (τ t s)/∂s∂t
0
s
Because we know ΛY2 (t ∗ ) and ΛY1 , this identifies ∆1 . Similarly, we can identify Υ2 and ∆2 from
QY S and QSS .
Now, consider
∂[QSY (y 0 s) + QSS (y 0 s 0)]/∂s
= L(S)
G (ΛY1 (s) + Υ1 (y|s) ΛS1 (s))
λS1 (s)
for y > s. As we know ΛY1 , ΛS1 and Υ1 , we can find a nonempty open set in R2 on which we know
(S)
(S)
(S)
LG . The function −LG is real analytic, so this determines LG on (0 ∞)2 (recall the discussion
in the proof of Proposition 4). Together with LG (0 0) = 1, this identifies LG .
(ii) For Model 2b, t1  s1 ∈ R+ such that s1 < t1 and t2  s2 ∈ R+ such that s2 < t2 ,
−1
 t1  t2 3
Λ∆1 (t1 ) − Λ∆1 (s1 )
∂ QSS (y1  y2  s1  s2 )/∂s1 ∂s2 ∂y2
dy
dy1 =
2
3
Λ∆2 (t2 ) − Λ∆2 (s2 )
s1
s2 ∂ QSS (y1  y2  s1  s2 )/∂s1 ∂s2 ∂y1
Setting s1 = s2 = 0 and consecutively t1 = t ∗ and t2 = t ∗ identifies Λ∆2 and Λ∆1 . Identification of
Q.E.D.
G∆ follows as under (i).

REFERENCES
ABBRING, J. H. (2001): “Econometric Duration and Event-History Analysis,” Lecture Notes,
Department of Economics, The University of Chicago.
(2002): “Stayers versus Defecting Movers: A Note on the Identification of Defective Duration Models,” Economics Letters, 74, 327–331.
ABBRING, J. H., AND G. J. VAN DEN BERG (2002a): “Analyzing the Effect of Dynamically Assigned Treatments Using Duration Models, Binary Treatment Models, and Panel Data Models,” Mimeo, Free University, Amsterdam.
(2002b): “A Simple Procedure for Inference on Treatment Effects in Duration Models,”
Mimeo, Free University, Amsterdam.
(2003): “The Identifiability of the Mixed Proportional Hazards Competing Risks Model,”
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 65, 701–710.
ABBRING, J. H., G. J. VAN DEN BERG, AND J. C. VAN OURS (1997): “The Effect of Unemployment
Insurance Sanctions on the Transition Rate from Unemployment to Employment,” Working
Paper, Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam.
BILLINGSLEY, P. (1995): Probability and Measure, Third Edition. New York: Wiley.
BONNAL, L., D. FOUGÈRE, AND A. SÉRANDON (1997): “Evaluating the Impact of French Employment Policies on Individual Labour Market Histories,” Review of Economic Studies, 64,
683–713.
CARD, D., AND D. SULLIVAN (1988): “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs on
Movements In and Out of Employment,” Econometrica, 56, 497–530.
COX, D. R. (1959): “The Analysis of Exponentially Distributed Life-times with Two Types of
Failure,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 21, 411–421.
(1962): Renewal Theory. London: Methuen.

1516

J. ABBRING AND G. VAN DEN BERG

(1972): “Regression Models and Life-tables (with Discussion),” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 34, 187–202.
DAWID, A. P. (2000): “Causal Inference without Counterfactuals,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95, 407–448.
ELBERS, C., AND G. RIDDER (1982): “True and Spurious Duration Dependence: The Identifiability of the Proportional Hazard Model,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 403–409.
FLEMING, T. R., AND D. P. HARRINGTON (1991): Counting Processes and Survival Analysis. New
York: Wiley.
FREEDMAN, D. A. (2002): “On Specifying Graphical Models for Causation, and the Identification
Problem,” Technical Report 601, Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley,
CA.
GILL, R. D., AND J. M. ROBINS (2001): “Causal Inference for Complex Longitudinal Data: The
Continuous Case,” Annals of Statistics, 29, 1785–1811.
GRITZ, R. M. (1993): “The Impact of Training on the Frequency and Duration of Employment,”
Journal of Econometrics, 57, 21–51.
HECKMAN, J. J. (2000): “Causal Parameters and Policy Analysis in Economics: A Twentieth Century Retrospective,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 45–97.
HECKMAN, J. J., AND B. E. HONORÉ (1989): “The Identifiability of the Competing Risks Model,”
Biometrika, 76, 325–330.
HECKMAN, J. J., R. J. LALONDE, AND J. A. SMITH (1999): “The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume III, ed.
by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
HECKMAN, J. J., AND C. R. TABER (1994): “Econometric Mixture Models and More General
Models for Unobservables in Duration Analysis,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 3,
279–302.
HOLLAND, P. W. (1986): “Statistics and Causal Inference,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 81, 945–960.
HOLT, J. D., AND R. L. PRENTICE (1974): “Survival Analysis in Twin Studies and Matched Pair
Experiments,” Biometrika, 61, 17–30.
HONORÉ, B. E. (1991): “Identification Results for Duration Models with Multiple Spells or Timevarying Covariates,” Working Paper, Northwestern University, Evanston.
(1993): “Identification Results for Duration Models with Multiple Spells,” Review of Economic Studies, 60, 241–246.
HOROWITZ, J. L. (1999): “Semiparametric Estimation of a Proportional Hazard Model with Unobserved Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 67, 1001–1028.
KALBFLEISCH, J. D., AND R. L. PRENTICE (1980): The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data.
New York: Wiley.
LANCASTER, T. (1990): The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
LICHTENSTEIN, P., M. GATZ, AND S. BERG (1998): “A Twin Study of Mortality after Spousal
Bereavement,” Psychological Medicine, 28, 635–643.
LILLARD, L. A. (1993): “Simultaneous Equations for Hazards,” Journal of Econometrics, 56, 189–
217.
LILLARD, L. A., AND C. W. A. PANIS (1996): “Marital Status and Mortality: The Role of Health,”
Demography, 33, 313–327.
LOK, J. J. (2001): “Statistical Modelling of Causal Effects in Time,” Ph.D. Thesis, Division of
Mathematics and Computer Science, Faculty of Sciences, Free University, Amsterdam.
MANSKI, C. F. (1990): “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects,” American Economic Review, 80, 319–323.
(1997): “Monotone Treatment Response,” Econometrica, 65, 1311–1334.
MILLER, D. R. (1977): “A Note on Independence of Multivariate Lifetimes in Competing Risks
Models,” Annals of Statistics, 5, 576–579.

TREATMENT EFFECTS IN DURATION MODELS

1517

MORTENSEN, D. T. (1986): “Job Search and Labor Market Analysis,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
NEYMAN, J. (1923): “On the Application of Probability Theory to Agricultural Experiments. Essay on Principles,” Roczniki Nauk Rolniczych, 10, 1–51 (in Polish; edited and translated version
of Section 9 by D. M. Dabrowska and T. P. Speed (1990), Statistical Science, 5, 465–472).
PEARL, J. (2000): Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
RIDDER, G. (1990): “The Non-parametric Identification of Generalized Accelerated Failure-time
Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 57, 167–182.
RIDDER, G., AND I. TUNALI (1999): “Stratified Partial Likelihood Estimation,” Journal of Econometrics, 92, 193–232.
ROBINS, J. M. (1998): “Structural Nested Failure Time Models,” in The Encyclopedia of Biostatistics, ed. by P. Armitage and T. Colton. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
RUBIN, D. B. (1974): “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 688–701.
TSIATIS, A. (1975): “A Nonidentifiability Aspect of the Problem of Competing Risks,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 72, 20–22.
VAN DEN BERG, G. J. (2001): “Duration Models: Specification, Identification, and Multiple Durations,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Volume V, ed. by J. J. Heckman and E. Leamer. Amsterdam: North Holland.
VAN DEN BERG, G. J., B. VAN DER KLAAUW, AND J. C. VAN OURS (2004): “Punitive Sanctions
and the Transition Rate from Welfare to Work,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22, forthcoming.

