CHAPTER 7

Field Experiments in Markets
O. Al-Ubaydli*, x, {, 1, J.A. Listk, #, a
*Bahrain Center for Strategic, International and Energy Studies, Manama, Bahrain
x
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, United States
{
Mercatus Center, Arlington, VA, United States
k
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
#
NBER (National Bureau of Economic Research), Cambridge, MA, United States
1
Corresponding author: E-mail: omar@omar.ec

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Preamble
2.1 Deﬁning markets
2.2 Studies covered by the literature review
2.3 Classifying the ﬁeld experiments in markets
2.4 What are the advantages and disadvantages of ﬁeld experiments?
3. Main Results
3.1 Conventional commodity markets
3.2 Financial markets
3.3 Single auctions
3.4 Behavioral anomalies
3.5 Experience and behavioral anomalies
4. Methodological Insights
5. Closing Remarks
References

272
274
274
275
277
279
280
280
286
288
290
298
300
302
303

Abstract
This is a review of the literature of ﬁeld experimental studies of markets. The main results covered by
the review are as follows: (1) Generally speaking, markets organize the efﬁcient exchange of commodities; (2) There are some behavioral anomalies that impede efﬁcient exchange; (3) Many behavioral
anomalies disappear when traders are experienced.

Keywords
Behavioral economics; Field experiment; Markets; Welfare theorems

JEL Codes
B21; B53; C93; D41; D51; D61

a

We would like to thank Andrew Simon for excellent research assistance.

Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Volume 1
ISSN 2214-658X, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.hefe.2016.09.001

© 2017 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

271

272

Handbook of Field Experiments

1. INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, the study of economics is virtually synonymous with the study of markets,
with the most notable illustration being Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nationsdarguably the
discipline’s inaugural contribution. The Scottish economist’s treatise was followed by
seminal contributions from numerous luminaries such as Alfred Marshall, John Maynard
Keynes, Friedrich Von Hayek, Kenneth Arrow, Gary Becker, and Robert Lucas. While
the range of topics studied by economists has undoubtedly expanded in the years
following the Freakonomics revolution, markets remain the centerpiece of the discipline’s
intellectual mission. For example, in the 14 years since 2001, eight Nobel prizes in economics have been explicitly for research on markets, and of the remaining six, two were
for econometric methods that are most frequently applied to the study of markets.
The methodological tools deployed by economists have evolved from the narrative
and deductive arguments of the likes of John Stuart Mill, going on to introduction of
elementary mathematical methods by the likes of Leon Walras, followed by the formal
decision-theoretic mathematical machinery used by the likes of John Hicks and Gerard
Debreu, the game-theoretic analysis of scholars such as James Mirrlees and George
Akerlof, and most recently, the arrival of agent-based modeling. These theoretical
contributions have been complemented by a huge volume of empirical work, with
some of the most notable studies relating to international trade and ﬁnancial markets.
Without doubt, our understanding of how markets function has advanced immeasurably
due to the efforts of the aforementioned scholars.
Until the 2002 Nobel prize, one of the most important contributions to our understanding of marketsdVernon Smith’s (1962, 1965) real-stakes double oral auctionsd
remained under the radar of most mainstream economists. Smith’s experiments, which
followed in the footsteps of Chamberlin (1948), spawned a massive experimental literature
investigating market processes. Subsequent scholars have examined alternative institutions,
such as conventional auctions (Coppinger et al., 1980), decentralized bilateral bargaining
(Hong and Plott, 1982), and posted prices (Plott, 1986). They have also varied the information structure to study important phenomena such as asset bubbles (Smith et al., 1988),
while other studies have examined the possibility of social preferences interfering with the
market-clearing process (Fehr et al., 1993). The single most important conclusion
emerging from the early experimental literature was one that no theoretical or nonexperimental study had ever convincingly demonstrated: markets lead to the efﬁcient exchange
of commodities, and that this occurs even when many of the traditional assumptions of
“perfect markets” break down, that is, when there is a small number of price-setting traders
who have incomplete information, and in the absence of a centralized orchestrator such as
the nebulous “Walrasian auctioneer” (Hayek, 1945; Smith, 1982).
Compared to conventional naturally occurring data, the key advantage offered by the
laboratory experimental methods pioneered by Vernon Smith was the ability to

Field Experiments in Markets

artiﬁcially control how much traders valued the commodities being traded (known as
inducing values), as this allowed researchers to accurately estimate demand-and-supply
schedules, thereby permitting a precise welfare analysis. This point should not be understated: while mainstream economics embraced Adam Smith’s theory of the “invisible
hand,” it took almost 200 years for economists to present plausible evidence of the phenomenon. Despite the fundamental importance of this result, laboratory experiments in
general (let alone ones used to study markets) remained a niche tool. One of the reasons
for the relative lack of enthusiasm among many mainstream economists was the
perceived artiﬁciality of laboratory experiments; many scholars were concerned that
the small stakes, the restricted strategy space, the inexperience of subjects, and the scrutiny
of the experimenter all contributed to empirical insights that were of limited value to understanding naturally occurring markets (Levitt and List, 2007). In particular, many
behavioral anomalies that were regularly detected in laboratory experiments, such as
the endowment effect (Knetsch, 1989) and reciprocity in zero-reputation environments
(Fehr and Gachter, 2002), were inconsistent with both the premises and the conclusions
of the neoclassical model, and were being used as an intellectual platform to challenge
mainstream economics.
Just as the theoretical and empirical literature on markets developed in line with the
advancement of the available methodological tools, so too did the subliterature on experimental studies of markets with the advent of ﬁeld experimental techniques in the early
2000s. This change was a fundamental step toward unifying empirical methods as in
many situations, ﬁeld experimental techniques offered the advantages of both conventional naturally occurring data and laboratory experimental data with neither set of disadvantages. Empirical economists who would previously reject laboratory experimental
data due to a perceived lack of realism embraced natural ﬁeld experiments as an elixir for
the endogeneity problem associated with naturally occurring data.
In particular, ﬁeld experiments allowed researchers to investigate real traders operating in real markets without the researcher having to surrender control over the environment. Consequently, the literature offered more sophisticated answers to questions
such as: “how prevalent is ethnic discrimination in rental markets?,” (Ahmed and
Hammarstedt, 2008), “what are the productivity consequences of increasing wage
rates?,” (Gneezy and List, 2006), and “what is the impact of business training on the
microﬁnance market?” (Karlan and Valdivia, 2011).
Markets are a large and extremely diverse area of research, and many of the other
studies in this volume cover important components of the literature. In this review,
we focus on the overarching conclusions. Moreover, in the light of the literature’s relative youth, we also discuss some of methodological issues associated with the literature.
In our review of the literature on ﬁeld experimental studies of markets, we present
three main conclusions: First is the most important one as, generally speaking, markets
organize the efﬁcient exchange of commodities; second, consistent with much of the

273

274

Handbook of Field Experiments

laboratory experimental literature, there exist behavioral anomalies that impede markets’
ability to organize the efﬁcient exchange of commodities; and third, many behavioral
anomalies disappear when traders are sufﬁciently experienced in their roles, rehabilitating
markets’ ability to organize the efﬁcient exchange of commodities.
This review is organized as follows:Section 2 is the preamble, where we discuss how
markets are deﬁned, the studies that will be covered by this review, the classiﬁcation of
ﬁeld experimental studies of markets, and the advantages and disadvantages of ﬁeld experiments when studying markets;Section 3 is a presentation of the main results in the
literature;Section 4 is a discussion of the key methodological insights for scholars considering the use of ﬁeld experiments in an empirical market study; and Section 5 provides
closing remarks, including a discussion of possible future ﬁeld experimental studies of
markets.

2. PREAMBLE
The importance of markets to academic economics is self-evident, and many of the
earliest contributions to the experimental literature in general (Chamberlin, 1948; Smith,
1965) and to the ﬁeld-experimental subliterature in particular (List, 2004a) were studies
of markets. Accordingly, when the editors of this volume approached us with the idea of
writing a literature review on ﬁeld experiments in markets, in addition to being delighted
and honored by the proposal, we regarded it as a very logical component of a volume
dedicated to ﬁeld experiments.
As any author of a literature review is well aware, deciding on which studies to
include can be somewhat problematic as one attempts to balance the desire for parsimony
with efforts at being comprehensive. In addition to this conventional challenge, we
encountered an unexpected difﬁcultydﬁnding an operationally suitable deﬁnition of a
“market.”

2.1 Deﬁning markets
Somewhat perversely for a concept so central to the discipline of economics, economists
scarcely provide a deﬁnition of a market (Hodgson, 2008). As an illustration of this bizarre
lacuna, the otherwise comprehensive 1987 edition of the New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics does not even contain an entry on “markets”! (This omission is corrected in
the second edition published in 2008.) As we will see, a serious challenge for a review
article is that given any reasonable deﬁnition of a market, an overwhelmingly large number of research contributions can be classiﬁed as studies of a market.
In the light of the absence of a textbook deﬁnition, the layperson’s dictionary deﬁnition is an obvious starting point. According to Merriam-Webster, a market is: “The
course of commercial activity by which the exchange of commodities is effected,” or,
alternatively: “A meeting together of people for the purpose of trade by private purchase

Field Experiments in Markets

and sale and usually not by auction.” This concurs with the broad, Austrian-inspired deﬁnition offered by the second edition of the New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics: “All forms
of trade or exchange that involve private property, deﬁned loosely as assets under private
control,” (Hodgson, 2008).
In an effort to deploy specialist concepts and to narrow the characterization, the New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics offers a different deﬁnition along the following lines:
“Markets involve multiple exchanges, multiple buyers or multiple sellers, and thereby
a degree of competition. A market is deﬁned as an institution through which multiple
buyers or multiple sellers recurrently exchange a substantial number of commodities of
a particular type. Exchanges themselves take place in a framework of law and contract
enforceability. Markets involve legal and other rules that help to structure, organize
and legitimize exchange transactions. They involve pricing and trading routines that
help to establish a consensus over prices, and often help by communicating information
regarding products, prices, quantities potential buyers or potential sellers. Markets, in
short, are organized and institutionalized recurrent exchange.” (Hodgson, 2008).
According to the broadest deﬁnition, markets cover the organized exchange one
would encounter in a stock exchange, the relational exchange that is commonplace between two ﬁrms with a repeating supply arrangement, the one-off, haphazard exchange
that may be observed under Craigslist, and the completely informal transaction whereby
a teenager shovels snow from a neighbor’s driveway in exchange for $20. If one switches
to the narrower deﬁnition, one could make an argument for excluding all but the stock
exchange example. However, the specter of potential or latent competition combined
with the existence of a legal system that permits civil lawsuits together ensure that one
could make a perfectly legitimate argument for classifying all four of the examples as market transactions according to both the broad and narrow deﬁnitions. This complicates the
process of selecting which studies to include in the literature review.

2.2 Studies covered by the literature review
As indicated above, starting with a broad deﬁnition of markets leaves us struggling to
exclude studies from our literature review. After all, the industrial organization
literatureda huge literaturedis automatically subsumed into the market’s literature.
As an illustration, if one examines the latest (at the time of writing) issue of the American
Economic Review (105:2), there are 14 papers, of which we regard 10 as being about markets. Informally browsing other issues of the same and other leading journals conﬁrms
that a majority of economics papers can be classiﬁed as a market study of some sort.
Field experiments constitute a small minority of papers published in journals such as
the American Economic Review; thus, perhaps restricting our attention to ﬁeld experimental
studies of markets will make the coverage manageable. At this point, we note that we are
employing the Harrison and List (2004) deﬁnition of ﬁeld experiments, which means the

275

276

Handbook of Field Experiments

union of artefactual, framed, and natural ﬁeld experiments, to the exclusion of conventional laboratory experiments.
• Conventional laboratory experiments employ a standard subject pool of students, an abstract framing, and an imposed set of rules.
• An artefactual ﬁeld experiment is the same as a conventional laboratory experiments, but
with a nonstandard subject pool.
• A framed ﬁeld experiment is the same as an artefactual ﬁeld experiment but with ﬁeld
context in either the commodity, task, or information set that the subjects can use.
• A natural ﬁeld experiment is the same as a framed ﬁeld experiment but where the environment is one where the subjects naturally undertake these tasks and where the subjects do not know that they are in an experiment.
The easiest way to restrict our attention to ﬁeld experiments is to use the electronic
paper repository www.ﬁeldexperiments.com (note that this is a highly incomplete database but it is accurate in the sense that any included paper is deﬁnitely a ﬁeld experiment).
Again, somewhat informally, we look at the ﬁrst 50 of the approximately 350 listed papers in alphabetical order, and we ﬁnd 25 papers that can reasonably be classiﬁed as studies
of markets, covering topics as diverse as the returns to education, large-scale blood donation, ethnic discrimination in rental markets, behavior in sealed-bid auctions, real versus
hypothetical willingness-to-pay for consumer goods, and the manipulation of betting
markets.
As an alternative, we also conducted a JSTOR search of articles containing the words
“ﬁeld experiment” in the title sorted in reverse chronological order. Again, out of the ﬁrst
50 papers, we found 25 that can reasonably be classiﬁed as studies of markets, also
covering a wide array of topics such as the demand for insurance, vote buying in West
Africa, microﬁnance in Guatemala, skilled immigrants in labor markets, pricing health
products, female entrepreneurship, and product customization.
The main conclusion that we draw from this informal search and classiﬁcation exercise is that an exhaustive review of ﬁeld experiments on markets is impossible. Moreover,
even if one were to make it feasible by reviewing a randomly selected sample of the papers, it is not clear that such a review would be of much scientiﬁc value given the diversity
of topics covered by ﬁeld experiments on markets.
In light of the above, this review will deliver extra focus on methodological issues.
We will survey a broad range of ﬁeld experiments with the goal of giving insight on
recurring methodological issues that arise.
Another factor to consider is the other contributions in this volume, as many of them
cover topics that overlap signiﬁcantly with “markets”. To avoid needless replication, we
will cover the following topics minimally at most: marketing; issues speciﬁcally relating to
developing countries and antipoverty interventions; discrimination; education; and labor
markets.

Field Experiments in Markets

2.3 Classifying the ﬁeld experiments in markets
Our review will cover the overarching results in ﬁeld experimental studies of markets
without structuring the results around a classiﬁcation of the studies. However, in the
background, it is instructive to keep the following classiﬁcation in mind as it helps
organize the types of contribution. We classify the literature along three primary
dimensions.
First: studies that investigate a speciﬁc market institution with the aim of gaining a
better understanding regarding how it functions, versus studies that do not. Thus, for
example, Lucking-Reiley (1999) uses a framed ﬁeld experiment to test the revenue
equivalence of ﬁrst-price sealed bid and Dutch auctions; this clearly constitutes an investigation of a speciﬁc market institution. On the other hand, Bertrand et al. (2010) study
the effect of advertising content on demand for the advertised product; the highly
context-speciﬁc nature of the investigation combined with the lack of focus on the rules
of the exchange process render this study as not an investigation of a speciﬁc market
institution.
Second: studies where the empirical modeling is structural versus reduced-form
(consider them as the two end-points of a spectrum). We deﬁne structural modeling
as an econometric speciﬁcation derived from explicit modeling of the optimization problems faced by the different decision makers. Typically, this includes an equilibrium
concept to reconcile the decision-makers’ optimization as a step toward developing an
econometric speciﬁcation. Such models are primarily deductive methods of building
knowledge. In contrast, in a reduced-form model, the econometric speciﬁcation can
be interpreted at face value rather than the end point of a series of optimization problems
by agents. Reduced-form modeling corresponds to an inductive approach toward building
the knowledge.
The choice of structural versus reduced-form modeling in ﬁeld experimental studies
of markets is more noteworthy than in typical economics research. For most ﬁelds, the
researcher makes a largely unrestricted choice between the two techniques on the basis
of the standard pros and cons: on the one hand, structural models involve more arbitrary
assumptions (thereby risking serious speciﬁcation errors) and they can be particularly data
hungry; on the other hand, structural models can help inform more statistically efﬁcient
econometric speciﬁcations (including superior extrapolation), and they permit welfare
and counterfactual analysis.
In empirical studies of markets, researchers face an additional hurdle when considering structural models: in markets with large numbers of buyers and sellers interacting
physically and verbally, it may be very difﬁcult to model the strategy space in a way
that is both tractable enough to permit the derivation of an estimable econometric speciﬁcation, and complex enough to capture the institution’s essence. For example, despite
well over a century of seasoned effort by the profession’s biggest names, economists are

277

278

Handbook of Field Experiments

yet to offer a substantive advance over the basic Walrasian model of demand and supply
using modern game-theoretic techniques, and this is primarily the result of the environment’s intractability (Al-Ubaydli et al., 2012). (An alternative route taken by some
studies, such as Gjerstad and Dickhaut (1998), is to relax the strict rationality assumption
and use agent-based modeling to derive testable predictions.) Thus, in the context of the
literature on ﬁeld experimental studies of markets, in many institutions, we ﬁnd an
extraordinary dearth of structural models because of their infeasibility. The consequent
abundance of reduced-form models reﬂects researchers’ efforts at inductively learning
about markets with any method that comes to hand. There is much to be gained from
ﬁlling this gap in the literature since markets that are difﬁcult to model are the heartbeat
of modern economies, and concrete welfare analysis of real markets is the holy grail.
Third: studies where all theoretical and empirical modeling conforms to the neoclassical blueprint, versus studies where explicit consideration is given to behavioral alternatives to the neoclassical model. A useful operational deﬁnition of neoclassical models is
one where each decision maker maximizes expected utility over her own money outcomes, and where uncertainty is modeled according to rational expectations. The
most frequent behavioral alternatives to the neoclassical model correspond to a breakdown of egoism (e.g., inequity aversion, reciprocity in one-shot environments) or a
breakdown of expected utility (e.g., loss aversion, ambiguity aversion).
As in the case of the structural- versus reduced-form dimension, the neoclassical- versus
behavioral dimension is noteworthy in the empirical studies of the market’s literature. Ever
since the days of Adam Smith, there has been a vibrant debate over whether unregulated
markets can deliver efﬁcient outcomes. The debate crosses over disciplines and remains a
highly politicized issue. According to the ﬁrst welfare theorem, a market operating under
the conditions of the neoclassical model will operate efﬁciently. As such, when researchers
posit behavioral alternatives to the neoclassical model as being superior, in many cases, they
are not merely attempting to reﬁne the predictive accuracy of the narrow model at hand;
rather, they are attacking the ﬁrst welfare theorem by undermining its tenets. Conversely,
when a study rejects a behavioral alternative to the neoclassical model, it is often attempting
to rehabilitate the ﬁrst welfare theorem. Naturally, these trends are not absolute, and many
insightful contributions to the behavioral versus neoclassical debate reﬂect attempts at
reﬁning our understanding of a speciﬁc market scenario only. However, in general, consumers of the literature on empirical studies of markets should bear in mind that studies
that empirically investigate behavioral preferences are often trying to make a much more signiﬁcant point about the efﬁciency of unregulated markets and the desirability of corrective
government intervention. Accordingly, such studies are associated with a political and/or
sociological undercurrent that emotionally inﬂames the debate.
In summary, similar to most literature, the ﬁeld experimental studies of the market’s
literature involves a mixture of studies that focus on general principles as well as those that
drill deeper into speciﬁc cases (i.e., speciﬁc market institutions). However, unlike most

Field Experiments in Markets

literature, structural modeling is underrepresented in the ﬁeld experimental studies of the
market’s literature due to the difﬁculty of tractably modeling even the simplest markets.
Further, in the context of behavioral versus neoclassical modeling, the ﬁeld experimental
studies of the market’s literature is an intellectual battleground for a much larger and more
signiﬁcant debate over the ﬁrst welfare theorem and the desirability of government intervention in markets. As such, even somewhat mundane issues such as the existence of the
endowment effect (List, 2003) can become ﬂashpoints.

2.4 What are the advantages and disadvantages of ﬁeld experiments?
Most types of data can be classiﬁed into one of the three categories: naturally occurring
data, laboratory experimental data, and ﬁeld experimental data. The merits of experimental data as a whole compared to naturally occurring data are well understood (Kagel
and Roth, 1997), and more recently, economists have extensively debated the pros and
cons of laboratory- and ﬁeld experimental data (Levitt and List, 2007; Falk and Heckman,
2009; Frechette and Schotter, 2015). While the general principles presented in those
debates apply well to empirical studies of markets, there are some idiosyncratic factors
that are worth mentioning.
As discussed above, markets are especially interesting because economists are
constantly searching for evidence of their ability to deliver efﬁcient outcomes. Assessing
the efﬁciency requires knowledge of the agent’s preferences over different outcomes;
most commonly, this refers to buyers’ (sellers’) values (costs) of the commodities being
traded. Generally speaking, this is very difﬁcult because the values are homegrown
(meaning that they are assigned organically rather than explicitly by an experimenter),
and so the information has to be extracted from the traders. Further, in most market institutions, traders are faced with strong incentives to misrepresent their true valuations over
commoditiesdspeciﬁcally to gain a bargaining advantage. (In studies of discrimination in
the marketplace, there is an added incentive to conceal true valuations: not wanting to be
perceived as a bigot due to, for example, harboring animosity toward people of a certain
race.) One of the most commonly used methods for eliciting trader values is surveys (also
known as contingent valuation); in spite of the deployment of a variety of complex
schemes, they remain costly, unwieldy, and unreliable methods of estimating values
(Diamond and Hausman, 1994).
Experiments offer researchers a way of assessing efﬁciency: researchers can induce
values rather than relying on homegrown values that are extremely difﬁcult to recover.
Note that this is distinct from the most commonly cited advantage of experiments, which
is that they permit randomization. This is why Vernon Smith’s real stakes experiments
(Smith, 1962, 1965) are retrospectively considered so path-breaking; they were the ﬁrst
systematic and transparent demonstrations of a “regular” market equilibrating according
to Walrasian dynamics.

279

280

Handbook of Field Experiments

To a large extent, the virtue of being able to induce values is restricted to laboratory
experiments. In natural ﬁeld experiments, researchers can easily inﬂuence homegrown
values, but only in limited circumstances can they induce values, and full-information is
usually required for assessing the efﬁciency. One intelligent workaround is for a
researcher to use confederates whose values are induced and whose behaviors are strictly
controlled by the researcher, and to have the confederates interact covertly with a regular
trader who is unaware of the experiment (List, 2006a). While the regular trader’s values
are homegrown and unknown, knowledge of the confederate’s value only can be sufﬁcient for assessing some issues pertaining to efﬁciency.
Efﬁciency is not the be-all and end-all of market studies; however, there are a wide
range of intellectually valuable questions that do not relate to efﬁciency and, more
importantly, do not require knowledge of values. The literature on discrimination in
the market place is a good example as techniques can be deployed to detect and evaluate
discrimination without necessarily knowing the values of the commodities being traded.
Auction studies that focus on comparing the revenue-generating properties of different
schemes (rather than the efﬁciency of the allocation) also fall into this category. In these
situations, the usual pros and cons associated with natural, laboratory, and ﬁeldexperimental data apply.

3. MAIN RESULTS
3.1 Conventional commodity markets
In our opinion, the most important result in ﬁeld experiments in general (let alone ﬁeld
experimental studies of markets) is no more than a replication of the most important
result in laboratory experiments in general. We therefore regard the result as being the
most important result in experimental economics, and certainly one of the most important results in empirical economics (if not the most important).
Result 1.1: Markets based on decentralized trade successfully organize the efﬁcient
exchange of commodities.
The ﬂagship paper for this result is List (2004a). To properly understand this paper,
one needs to ﬁrst cover two of its pivotal antecedents, Chamberlin (1948) and Smith
(1962), both of which were conventional laboratory experiments.
In Chamberlin (1948), subjects were divided into buyers and sellers and assigned a
value v that was private information (the induced value). The traders participated in a
market for a ﬁctitious commodity where buyers were seeking to purchase one unit
and sellers were seeking to sell one unit. In the event of a successful trade at price p,
the buyer would earn v e p, and the seller would earn p e v; failure to trade would result
in earnings of zero. Thus, the value operated as a reserve price for traders. This payoff
structure allows the experimenter to draw a stepwise demand and supply schedule, which
in turn permits the prediction of an equilibrium price, and the designation of

Field Experiments in Markets

intramarginal and extramarginal traders. For full efﬁciency, all intramarginal traders
should trade, and none of the extramarginal traders should.
The Chamberlin trading environment operated according to the following rules:
• During the trading round, traders had the opportunity to mill around and try to
secure a trade via unrestricted verbal negotiations, within earshot of other traders.
• Upon successfully negotiating a trade, the two traders would notify the experimenter,
at which point the trade price would be publicly declared.
A crucial feature of Chamberlin’s experiment was that the earnings were entirely hypothetical; subjects were instructed to behave as if they were earning real money.
The primary variable of interest (retrospectively) was that actual rents realized as a
proportion of potential rents, known as the efﬁciency. This is equivalent to examining
the extent to which intramarginal traders managed to trade vis-a-vis extramarginal
ones. Almost equivalent is examining the extent to which, and speed with which, trading
prices converged to the predicted equilibrium price.
Chamberlin found that prices were volatile, and that they converged to a belowequilibrium price, implying less-than-fully-efﬁcient exchange. He ascribed this to the
possibility that in his experiments, buyers were better bargainers than sellers because
most subjects only had real-life experience being buyers.
Vernon Smith reasoned otherwise, positing three potential reasons for the failure of
the Chamberlin market to equilibrate in the predicted fashion. First, the lack of ﬁnancial
incentives; second, the lack of experience (subjects would play a very limited number of
rounds); and third, the limited circulation of information; in particular, only trade prices
were truly public, and regular bids and offers were usually known only by the pair of
traders involved.
Smith (1962, 1965) tested his hypotheses by introducing ﬁnancial incentives, giving
the subjects more experience in trading, and by changing the trading rules from
Chamberlin’s decentralized bilateral bargaining with public prices to a double oral
auction. In Smith’s setup, which resembles a traditional trading pit, all bids and offers
were public information, including those that actually led to trades. As a result,
prices rapidly converged to the Walrasian equilibrium, and extremely high levels of efﬁciency were observed. A huge subsequent literature conﬁrmed the robustness of these
ﬁndings.
As remarked earlier, Smith’s work was the ﬁrst convincing demonstration of Walrasian dynamics and of the invisible hand, and this was possible because of induced preferences (values). Despite the magnitude of the intellectual leap taken by Smith, there was
still an intellectual gap between Smith’s results and real, non-artiﬁcial markets due to his
reliance on conventional laboratory experiments. Decades of research in social psychology had demonstrated that the unusual conditions associated with conventional laboratory experiments could generate behaviors that were unreﬂective of behaviors
outside the laboratory (Levitt and List, 2007). Thus, the challenge for subsequent scholars

281

282

Handbook of Field Experiments

was to see if there was some way to make use of Chamberlin’s and Smith’s innovations
in the ﬁeld.
This brings us to List (2004a), which was nominally a ﬁeld-based melange of
Chamberlin (1948) and Smith (1962, 1965). Ideally, List would have run a natural ﬁeld
experiment. However, scholars are yet to discover a way of inducing values in a manner
that is compatible with natural ﬁeld experiments’ deﬁning characteristic, namely, the
subject being unaware of their participation in an experiment. Certainly, an experimenter
can covertly inﬂuence a subject’s homegrown value via, for example, advertising;
however, constructing precise demand and supply schedules requires knowledge of the
exact value.
Survey methods could, in principle, allow the research to bypass the need to induce
values. However, they are yet to provide the solution for several reasons. First, there remains signiﬁcant controversy over survey method’s ability to deliver accurate estimates of
homegrown values (Diamond and Hausman, 1994). Second, constructing demand and
supply schedules that can be tractably analyzed requires a small, contained market and
a short time horizon. Such markets are quite difﬁcult to come by in practice, and if
they are covertly constructed by an experimenter, adding something as unusual as contingent-value surveys would surely undermine the experimenter’s efforts at maintaining the
subjects’ ignorance of the experiment.
Thus, List conceded that with the tools available at the time (and still today, to the
best of our knowledge), the closest he could come to a natural ﬁeld experiment of a market with a known demand and supply schedule was a framed ﬁeld experiment. List’s task
was therefore to ﬁnd a real market with the following two features: First, it would be a
market where a representative sample of traders would be willing to participate in an
experiment; Second, it would be a market that could be effectively mimicked in a laboratory environment with a small number of traders.
In the end, List chose the decentralized bilateral bargaining market that was selected
by Chamberlin, and that is currently deployed in the trading of sports paraphernalia and
collector pins. Why did List choose a Chamberlin market rather than a double oral auction, such as those that can be found in the Chicago Board of Trade, a double electronic
auction similar to those operating in modern stock exchanges, or any one of the
numerous alternatives? For sure, the primary motivation was feasibility rather than the
belief that these two markets were in some way systematically more interesting or representative than other markets. In particular, being a keen trader in the markets afforded
List the knowledge and the contact network necessary to formulate and run the experiments. See List (2011b) for more advice on executing natural ﬁeld experiments.
List’s (2004a) Chamberlin market differed slightly from its progenitor in that the
sellers worked from ﬁxed trading desks, and the ability to move around the trading
area was restricted to the buyers. This was to more closely mimic the markets being studied: sports paraphernalia exhibitions look similar to farmer’s markets, whereby sellers

Field Experiments in Markets

display their wares at ﬁxed installations and in the immediate proximity of other sellers.
Also, the commodity being traded was less abstract than the completely ﬁctitious
commodity in Chamberlin (1948) and Smith (1962, 1965): it was a real item from the
market being studied, but damaged so that it would have no intrinsic value, and so
that the experimenter was free to induce values as required. The induced demand and
supply schedules for some of the rounds can be seen in Fig. 1 below, where the equilibrium price is predicted to lie in the range $13e$14.
These differences were largely cosmetic. From a scientiﬁc viewpoint, the key differences were those that rendered List (2004a) a framed ﬁeld experiment: the subjects were
real buyers and sellers from sports paraphernalia and commemorative pin markets, and
each occupied its natural role with a natural level of experience, and the stakes (induced
values) were calibrated to natural levels.
List (2004a) experimented with different genders and ages of participants, and, more
importantly, with different-shaped demand and supply schedules, including some highly
asymmetric systems where one out of demand or supply was perfectly elastic. Overall, he
found consistent convergence of prices to equilibrium (average trade prices were always
in the range $13e$14), and consequently, high levels of efﬁciency (95% on average for
the later trading rounds). The efﬁciency was achieved without requiring bids and offers to
be public information, as in a double oral auction. This is notable because at a casual level,
most markets are not typiﬁed by public bids and offers, and so it would be concerning for
economists if their ﬂagship model for predicting prices depended on institutional features
rarely seen in practice.

Price

Demand

Supply

20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
1

3

5

7
Quantity

9

11

13

Figure 1 Demand/supply schedules in the symmetric markets in List (2004a).

283

284

Handbook of Field Experiments

List and Price (2006) repeat List (2004a), but they had a smaller number of sellers each
of whom could sell multiple units. They also observed efﬁciency levels of the order of
95%.
Relatedly, Haushofer and Zurlinden (2013) stage a double auction game with 220
residents of the informal settlement of Kibera in Nairobi, Kenya. Each participant is
assigned the role of buyer or seller and given a reservation price of 20 or 10 KES, respectively. Transaction prices converge rapidly to slightly over 11 (but less than 12) within
four rounds, and the rate of convergence is strongly associated with mathematical ability
in both buyers and sellers. When roles were switched, offered prices dropped more
rapidly, suggesting that observational learning plays a role in the development of market
behavior. In general, the paper ﬁnds evidence that neoclassical price theory can accurately
predict market behavior with nonstandard subjects.
Likewise, Waichman and Ness (2012) run an artefactual ﬁeld experiment in which 45
German farmers and 45 students participate in one of three decentralized bargaining markets, differing only in market size. Subjects are randomly assigned a reservation value and
the role of buyer or seller. The allocative efﬁciency ratio is, on average, higher than 80%
in all treatments, though statistically signiﬁcantly lower than 100%. There are no significant differences between the farmers’ and students’ trading volumes and prices; however,
in two pairs of treatments and in the pooled data, farmers create surpluses that signiﬁcantly exceed those of students and those predicted by market equilibrium. Waichman
and Ness’s results conﬁrm that neoclassical competitive theory predicts the allocative efﬁciency outcome of this type of market well. Both studies are at odds with Chamberlin
(1948), but lend support to List’s (2004a) results.
To add theoretical structure to these empirical insights, Miller (2013) presents a General Convergence Theorem explaining the convergence of markets to the competitive equilibrium (CE). This theory posits that if prices converge in a market in which there are no
loss-generating trades or proﬁtable units left untraded, the prices and quantities must
converge to a CE. To demonstrate this model, Miller modiﬁes Gode and Sunder’s
(1993) zero-intelligence agent (ZIA) market simulations by adding status consciousness
to the agents and running both Smith and Chamberlin market treatments. He ﬁnds
that all experiments converge to the CE according to the General Convergence
Theorem.
To the best of our knowledge, other than a handful of experiments (a few of which
we just mentioned), List (2004a) did not spawn a wave of induced-value framed ﬁeld
experiments in a manner similar to Smith (1962, 1965), and so there are few other
studies to report. For the reasons discussed in Section 2.3dthe difﬁculty of developing
a tractable modeldfew studies that do investigate Walrasian dynamics do not employ
any structural modeling. Thus, while papers such as List (2004a) add signiﬁcantly to our
understanding of the market process, there remains a large theoretical gap that economists need to ﬁll.

Field Experiments in Markets

Before discussing some of the other market institutions studied in the literature, we
brieﬂy take a detour relating to the work of Friedrich Von Hayek. The general equilibrium version of the Walrasian model that was advanced by Kenneth Arrow and Gerard
Debreu is tractable because it is a decision-theoretic model rather than a game-theoretic
one: agents are price-takers and nobody in the model actively sets prices. The model is
associated with the list of “perfect market” assumptions that is familiar to undergraduate
economics students and often derided by non-economists for their implausibilityd
perfect information (of all prices), no externalities, price-taking behavior (possibly justiﬁed by having a continuum of traders), and rational expectations.
Employing a narrative mode of argument rather than the mathematical modeling
techniques now considered mainstream, Hayek (1945) regarded these assumptions as
unnecessary for markets to serve their most important functiondfacilitating the efﬁcient exchange of commodities. Rather than the static and certainty-ﬁlled markets of
the ArroweDebreu universe, Hayek regarded markets as being inherently dynamic
and unpredictable. He characterized the environment as being driven by price-setting,
risk-taking entrepreneurs who would make new markets and eliminate existing ones
through a process of creative destruction. Insofar as an equilibrium price even exists,
a Hayekian economist believes that the path to the equilibrium is where the market
creates value; in contrast, a traditional neoclassical economist regards the out-ofequilibrium activity as a nuisance, and the equilibrium as being where the rubber meets
the road.
Vernon Smith attached the name the “Hayek hypothesis” to the idea that none of the
perfect market’s assumptions was necessary for the efﬁcient functioning of a market
(Smith, 1982). Smith’s laboratory experiments provided strong evidence to support
this view: the double oral auctions led to efﬁcient exchange even though the number
of traders was small (around 20), the traders set prices, information was incomplete
and imperfect, expectations were not necessarily rational, and there was no centralized
orchestrator. Al-Ubaydli and Boettke (2012) reviewed the ﬁeld experimental literatured
including the studies considered in this paperdand they also found strong support.
Result 1.2: Result 1.1 holds even when many of the conditions of the standard neoclassical model break down, speciﬁcally when the number of traders are small, traders are
price setters, information is incomplete and/or imperfect, expectations are not rational,
and there is no centralized orchestrator (Al-Ubaydli and Boettke, 2012).
The environments in List (2004a) and List and Price (2006) clearly violate the standard
perfect market assumptions and look much closer to the sort of market that Hayek envisaged (see Joyce (1984) for an experiment with an actual Walrasian auctioneer). We urge
scholars to more seriously consider the Hayekian approach as they design future ﬁeld experiments since neoclassical modeling techniques have yielded essentially no testable predictions since Walras (1874). For more on Hayek’s work, see Boettke (2012), Boettke
and O’Donnell (2013), Boettke and Candela (2014), and Boettke et al. (2014).

285

286

Handbook of Field Experiments

3.2 Financial markets
In conventional markets, traders are certain of the value to themselves of the commodities
being traded, and they are imperfectly informed about the commodities’ values to other
traders. Job of prices is to give each trader information about how much the
other traders value the different commodities, thereby helping each trader to decide
how to allocate his or her resources across the available commodities. Efﬁciency is
gauged by the extent to which commodities end up being consumed by those who
value them the most. Equivalently, inefﬁciency is indicated by prices that result in
sub-optimal consumption.
In classically conceived ﬁnancial markets, each commodity being traded is valued
equally by all traders (apart from risk preferences), but the traders are imperfectly
informed about what that value is. If traders are heterogeneously imperfectly informed
about the common value, then the job of the price is to disseminate information about
the commodity’s fundamental value. Inefﬁciency is indicated by prices that depart significantly and persistently from the commodity’s fundamental value. The most common
illustration is an asset bubble.
Financial market experiments are attractive for the same reason that conventional
market experiments are: in real ﬁnancial markets, we are rarely aware of the fundamental
value of the asset, primarily due to incomplete information about the underlying probability distribution. (A good example of an exception is mechanized gambling, such as a
roulette wheel.) A laboratory experiment, such as Smith et al. (1988), affords researchers
the opportunity to manipulate the information available to traders while retaining full information about the true value of all the commodities.
An additional analogy with conventional market experiments is that natural ﬁeld experiments in ﬁnancial markets are relatively uninformative because the commodities’
fundamental values are unknown. Consequently, when we are looking to make deﬁnitive statements about efﬁciency in ﬁnancial markets, framed ﬁeld experiments are the
closest that we can get to natural ﬁeld experiments.
A key difference between studies of ﬁnancial and conventional markets is that the
additional structure makes theoretical modeling easier. While models still fail to capture
the process of making bids and offers in a fully satisfactory way, the literature has delivered
highly sophisticated structural models of how rational expectations of asset values are
formed, and how traders respond to the ﬂurry of information released continuously in
such markets (Bikchandani et al., 1992; Celen and Kariv, 2004).
Result 1.3: Evidence on the efﬁciency of ﬁnancial markets is mixed; while the
general tendency is toward efﬁcient prices, systematic deviations of limited magnitude
are regularly detected.
One method that researchers have employed to investigate the efﬁciency of ﬁnancial
markets is experiments that measure the incidence of Bayesian decision-making in

Field Experiments in Markets

strategic settings: if everyone behaves in a Bayesian way, then information is aggregated
efﬁciently and, in the context of asset markets, asset prices will approach their fundamental value as quickly as possible. In Alevy et al. (2007), professional traders are placed
in a common state of the world and each is given a private, independently drawn signal
about the true state of the world. Each has to declare the state of the world he or she
believes that the traders are in based on all of the available information, and in a randomly
determined sequence. Thus, the ﬁrst trader can base his or her decision purely on his or
her private signal, but the second one can also make use of the ﬁrst trader’s statement, and
the third trader can make use of the ﬁrst two traders’ statements, and so on. Professional
traders are found to be Bayesian 76% of the time. Superﬁcially, this suggests that in a parallel market setting, asset prices would bear some reﬂection of the fundamental value, but
that they may also stray. Alevy et al.’s (2007) data offered some support for this view, with
traders entering reverse information cascades (herding on the wrong state) 3% of the time.
Cipriani and Guarino (2009) modify the Alevy et al. (2007) design to allow traders to
trade assets, where the returns to holding the assets depend upon the real state of the
world. Similar to Alevy et al. (2007), the authors ﬁnd that decision making is largely
rational, but with a small percentage of traders engaging in anomalous behavior,
including irrational abstention, contrarianism, and herding. Drehmann et al. (2007)
conduct a similar framed ﬁeld experiment, but with the addition of positive and negative
externalities in some of the treatments. Similar to the other two papers, they also ﬁnd a
moderate level of rational (Bayesian) decision-making.
Drehmann et al. (2004) have a framed ﬁeld experiment where the theoretical model
predicts no rational herding because the price performs its functiondaggregating
market information. In support of the model’s predictions, the authors fail to detect
any signiﬁcant herding. However, prices deviate systematically from the theoretically
predicted levels, and they attribute this to contrarian behavior among a subset of traders.
List and Haigh (2010) examine a model of options trading that makes sharp predictions about how traders should respond to the potential for future upside investment
news versus downside investment news. In their framed ﬁeld experiment, they ﬁnd
that professional traders largely adhere to the model’s predictions.
A separate strand of the literature on ﬁeld experiments in ﬁnancial markets examines
trading behavior without necessarily tying it to efﬁciency, and without requiring full information of assets’ fundamental values. This includes many studies that investigate the
susceptibility of professional traders to behavioral anomalies (Haigh and List, 2005).
Note that when such studies are used to draw conclusions about efﬁciency, then the evidence should be considered indirect: theoretical models present sufﬁcient rather than
necessary conditions for efﬁciency, and so a breakdown of the initial conditions or any
intermediate step does not alone imply inefﬁciency. We defer our discussion of these
behavioral anomalies studies to Section 3.4 below.

287

288

Handbook of Field Experiments

Overall, the number of framed ﬁeld experiments of ﬁnancial markets that permit a
direct assessment of efﬁciency is small, and it is miniscule when compared to the vibrant
laboratory experimental literature that was inspired by Smith et al. (1988). This is understandable because the chief protagonists in ﬁnancial markets are people whose time is
relatively expensive. For example, Drehmann et al. (2004, 2007) use McKinsey consultants. Conventional markets are typically populated by traders whose time can be purchased for amounts that fall within most research budgets, such as the ﬂea market
traders in List (2004a), meaning that framed ﬁeld experiments are feasible. Nevertheless,
we urge the profession to try to conduct more such experiments, especially in the light of
the limited usefulness of natural ﬁeld experiments for the assessment of issues pertaining
to efﬁciency.

3.3 Single auctions
Auctions are considerably easier to model theoretically than most market institutions for
two reasons. First, once the opening bell rings, only one side of the market (the buyers) is
active. Second, there are a lot more restrictions on the strategy space of the active side.
For example, in a sealed bid auction, conditional on their value, a buyer has no decision
to make beyond selecting one number. While sealed bid single auctions are very common in practice, we are unaware of any naturally occurring sealed bid double auctions.
As a result of the elevated tractability, models of auctions are able to produce a much
richer variety of testable predictions than models of standard markets, which have barely
gone beyond the predictions posited by Walras in the 19th century. Structural modeling
becomes an option (Brown and Morgan, 2009; Ely and Hossain, 2009). This is particularly exciting for ﬁeld experimentalists, because in the case of conventional markets,
scholars require knowledge of the values of market participants to be able to investigate
the limited range of testable predictions. Thus, while ﬁeld experimental investigations of
conventional markets are typically restricted to being framed ﬁeld experiments, with
natural ﬁeld experiments being incompatible with induced values, ﬁeld experiments of
auctions can easily be natural ﬁeld experiments.
A further reason for the comparative ease of ﬁeld experimentation with auctions is
that auctions are inherently one-off exercises, meaning that the researcher can oversee
and potentially control the entirety of the process. In contrast, conventional markets
are ﬂuid entities that sometimes have no perceivable starting or ending point (such as purchasing a good on Amazon), and they entertain much larger numbers of buyers and
sellers.
Due to the expanded opportunity for generating testable hypotheses, and the relative
youth of the literature on ﬁeld experiments, in our opinion, the literature is yet to produce the sort of overarching conclusions that we are interested in for the purposes of this
paper. We are particularly interested in results pertaining to efﬁciency, yet, to the best of

Field Experiments in Markets

our knowledge, these have not attracted anywhere near the research effort that they
receive in laboratory experiments on auctions (Kagel and Levin, 2014).
Instead, the literature on ﬁeld experiments in auctions is more focused on the issue of
revenue maximization from the seller’s perspective as a function of factors that can be
manipulated easily in a theoretical model and in practice, such as the seller’s stated reserve
price (Ostrovsky and Schwarz, 2011) or the auction type (Lucking-Reiley, 1999).
Accordingly, in this section, we give a brief overview of some of the most important papers, with an emphasis on those that contain methodological lessons.
An auction’s ﬁeld experimental paper that contains an instructive blend of theory and
empirics is Hossain and Morgan (2006). They use a 2  2 natural ﬁeld experiment
whereby they sell matched pairs of CDs and Xbox games on EBay. Their key treatment
variable is shipping costs: they compare bidding patterns across a high shipping cost treatment versus a low shipping cost treatment. To complete the design, they cross that treatment with a high total minimum bid versus low total minimum bid treatment. Together,
the design allows them to verify several basic predictions of auction theory. They report
that increasing the total minimum bid decreases the number of bidders and the probability of sale, but it increases the expected revenue conditional on sale. These results accord
well with standard auction theory.
As such, increasing the shipping costs while decreasing the minimum bid tends to increase the overall revenues (including shipping) obtained by the seller. This result holds
true for both Xbox games and audio CDs, as long as the total minimum bid is less than
30% of the retail price of the object. Interestingly, this effect disappears when the total
minimum bid is more than half the retail price, achieved in this experiment when an
$8 total minimum bid was applied to CDs. Though surprising from the point of view
of rational bidding theory, the authors point out that this result can be explained with
a simple model that involves bidders tending to ignore the size of shipping costs in an
auction unless shipping costs become unusually large.
Related to this research are the innovative framed ﬁeld experiments of LuckingReiley (1999) and Katkar and Reiley (2006). The ﬁrst study, as noted above, represents
an early example of how the internet can be used to test economic theory. LuckingReiley (1999) uses Internet-based auctions in a preexisting market with an unknown
number of participating bidders to test the theory of revenue equivalence between the
four major auction formats. Katkar and Reiley (2006) tests the auction theory related
to reserve prices, and in this way is in the spirit of Hossain and Morgan (2006). More speciﬁcally, Katkar and Reiley (2006) designs a natural ﬁeld experiment to compare outcomes in auctions with secret versus public reserve prices. Katkar and Reiley (2006)
auctioned 50 matched pairs of Pokeman trading cards on eBay. To gain identiﬁcation,
each card was auctioned twice, once with a minimum bid of 30% of the card’s book value
and once with a minimum bid of $0.05 and a secret reserve price equal to 30% of the
card’s book value. The use of a secret reserve price resulted in lower earnings for the

289

290

Handbook of Field Experiments

sellers than did making the reserve price known. Interestingly, keeping the reserve price
secret reduced: (1) the probability of selling the card, (2) the number of serious bidders in
an auction, and (3) the winning bid. Thus, contrary to the beliefs of many eBay sellers and
to the predictions of models of rational bidder behavior, using secret reserve prices instead
of public reserve prices actually lowers a seller’s expected returns, by lowering both the
probability that the auction will result in a sale, and the price received if it does result in a
sale. We consider these types of studies as ripe for replication and further study, as the
internet remains a useful, though underutilized experimental laboratory.
List and Lucking-Reiley (2000) test predictions associated with multiunit Vickrey
auctions using a sports card ﬁeld experiment. Theoretically, there should be a demand
reduction in uniform price auctions compared to Vickrey ones, and the authors ﬁnd evidence of this. Moreover, consonant with theory, the demand reduction is shown to be
inefﬁcient, and switching to Vickrey auctions to eliminate the inefﬁciency does not
adversely affect the seller’s revenues.
Online auction websites also offer researchers the opportunity to test the effects of
reputations. Modeling the effect of online reputations is more challenging than modeling
more basic features, such as the effect of a reserve price or auction type, and so the
associated ﬁeld experiments rely on reduced-form econometric methods. Both Jin and
Kato (2006) and Resnick et al. (2006) manipulate seller reputations and ﬁnd, as expected,
evidence that superior reputations lead to superior outcomes.
As explained above, an advantage of ﬁeld experiments is the expanded strategy space
compared to laboratory experiments. Grether et al. (2015) exploit this to ﬁnd evidence of
cyber-shilling in online automobile auctions: groups of buyers are found to behave in a
peculiar manner that suggests that they have been enlisted by sellers to work on their
behalf.
Finally, another strand of the literature examines charity auctions. Carpenter et al.
(2008) repeat Lucking-Reiley’s (1999) investigation of revenue differences, but in the
context of an auction that is designed to raise money for a charitable cause. This paper
again displays the advantages of using single auctions rather than double ones: the environment can be tractably modeled and sharp predictions derived. They ﬁnd that, contrary to theory and previous laboratory experiments, ﬁrst price auctions outperform
second price auctions and all pay-ones. They speculate that familiarity with the ﬁrst price
format is a key factor in explaining the results.

3.4 Behavioral anomalies
Behavioral economics has substantially enhanced the profession’s intellectual toolkit.
Early on, laboratory experiments were the ﬁeld’s dominant empirical method. The precision and ease of replication associated with laboratory experiments allowed researchers
to produce a laundry list of robust (in the laboratory, at least) deviations from the

Field Experiments in Markets

neoclassical model, such as the endowment effect, bounded rationality, and altruism.
However, many mainstream economists have expressed reluctance to accept these ﬁndings due to their dependence upon laboratory experiments, which they regard as an
ungeneralizable source of data. Further, the ﬁeld’s conclusions are often deployed as a
means of attacking the ﬁrst welfare theorem, thereby politicizing the debate (intentionally or otherwise), and attracting criticism unrelated to the generalizability of the supporting data.
For those with an exclusively methodological qualm with the ﬂagship results of
behavioral economics, ﬁeld experiments present an avenue for potentially resolving
the controversy. In fact, numerous attempts at exploring behavioral biases in a ﬁeld
setting have found the initial, laboratory-based conclusions to be robust, with important
implications for markets.
A welcome feature of the behavioral experimental literature is that a researcher’s
choice between structural and reduced-form modeling is not restricted by the intractability of structural models. Similar to auctions, the environment can be simpliﬁed in a
manner that permits the construction of insightful models.
The ﬁrst behavioral anomaly that we discuss is a derivative of the huge literature on
prospect theory, which is a reﬁnement of the expected utility theory.
Result 2.1: The endowment effect and loss aversion are observed in real markets and
impede efﬁcient exchange.
The following draws heavily from the literature review by Ericson and Fuster (2014).
The endowment effect is deﬁned as the observation that people seem to attach additional
value to things they own simply because they belong to them.
The typical laboratory demonstration (Knetsch, 1989) involves randomly assigning
subjects one of two commodities with similar values (such as a mug and a candy bar).
The experimenter then offers the subject the opportunity to trade the assigned commodity for the other one. If the observed likelihood of ending up with good 1 (e.g., the mug)
statistically depends (positively) upon the initial assignment, then this is evidence of the
endowment effect. It is often explained by appealing to loss aversion: the loss in utility
associated with giving up a good exceeds the gain associated with its acquisition.
If the endowment effect is strong and widespread, then it impedes the market’s ability
to allocate goods efﬁciently, as it makes people “irrationally” reluctant to trade. The ﬁrst
welfare theorem requires that, conditional on the market value of initial endowments,
ﬁnal consumption be independent of initial endowments, which is inconsistent with
the endowment effect.
The laboratory evidence of the endowment effect is strong, though it is not absolute
(Plott and Zeiler, 2005, 2007). In the ﬁeld, the evidence is more mixed. List (2003)
mimics Knetsch’s (1989) design, but covertly to ensure that the experiment is a natural
ﬁeld one. In a sports paraphernalia exhibition, he recruits participants for the completion
of a survey in exchange for a small amount of money and a sports card. The sports card is

291

292

Handbook of Field Experiments

one of the two comparably valued ones, and the assignment is randomized. After being
assigned the card and completing the survey (allowing time for the subject to build a sense
of attachment to the initially assigned card), the subject is offered the opportunity to exchange it for the remaining card. List detects the endowment effect, albeit primarily in
the case of inexperienced traders (we will discuss experienced ones below): 20% of those
randomly assigned card 1 traded it for card 2, and 26% those randomly assigned card 2
traded it for card 1 (these ﬁgures should sum to 100% if subjects do not suffer from
the endowment effect). List (2003) also ﬁnds similar results, also in a ﬁeld setting, as
do Englenmann and Hollard (2010). Inexperienced traders are present in most markets,
including sports paraphernalia markets, and so these experiments suggest that the endowment effect may well impede efﬁcient exchange in real markets. Apicella et al. (2014)
runs an endowment effect experiment with an isolated tribe of hunter-gathers, ﬁnding
that only those that have increased exposure to modern society display the endowment
effect.
In the context of ﬁnancial markets, Haigh and List (2005) found indirect evidence of
the endowment effect in a ﬁeld experiment where the participants are professional traders
from the Chicago Board of Trade. Subjects are asked to bet on lotteries designed to
detectdamong other thingsdthe presence of loss aversion. Previous laboratory experiments with standard student subject pools had demonstrated the prevalence of loss aversion; contrary to what was detected in sports paraphernalia markets, Haigh and List
(2005) found that loss aversion was even stronger among professional traders, conﬁrming
the possibility of the loss aversion (and hence the endowment effect) interfering with efﬁcient exchange.
Labor markets are another setting where loss aversion has been shown to drive supply-side behavior. Hossain and List (2012) ﬁnd that workers in a high-tech Chinese
manufacturing facility supply more effort when an incentive is framed as a loss instead
of a gain. Fryer et al. (2012) ﬁnd the same result with urban teachers. Tests of loss aversion
when the experimenter does not control the reference point have proven more mixed
with Goette et al. (2004) and Fehr and Goette (2007) ﬁnding evidence in favor and
Andersen et al. (2014) ﬁnding evidence against.
The second behavioral anomaly that we will cover is bounded rationality, that is,
limits to a decision maker’s ability to optimize. Many different forms of bounded rationality have been investigated by economists. In the context of ﬁeld experiments, the opportunities are more difﬁcult because preferences are almost always homegrown rather
than induced.
Result 2.2: Bounded rationality is observed in real markets and impedes efﬁcient
exchange.
The winner’s curse is a form of bounded rationality that has been observed in ﬁeld
experiments. It is deﬁned as the tendency for winning bids to systematically exceed
the value of an auctioned item in common value actions under uncertainty. The winner’s

Field Experiments in Markets

curse is an impediment to efﬁcient exchange because it can lead to a winning bid from a
buyer whodunbeknownst to him or herdvalues the item less than the seller does.
In laboratory experiments, testing for its presence is straightforward: an item is
assigned a common value and subjects are randomly assigned independently and identically distributed signals of the common value drawn from a distribution that is common
knowledge. Bidding then proceeds according to English auction rules, and the winning
bid is compared to the induced, common value. Laboratory experiments regularly detect
the winner’s curse (Kagel and Levin, 1986).
Harrison and List (2008) used framed ﬁeld experiments to test for the winner’s curse’s
presence when the bidders are professional auction participants drawn from sports paraphernalia exhibitions. They ﬁnd that professionals successfully avoid the winner’s curse
unless they adopt unfamiliar roles.
Hou et al. (2009) investigate the winner’s curse using a natural ﬁeld experiment on
eBay. They purchase collector coins that have been professionally certiﬁed, and then
they advertise them for auction without full information about the degree of certiﬁcation, thereby manipulating the degree of uncertainty about the common component
of the coins’ values. In this natural setting, they ﬁnd that for coins posted as uncertiﬁed,
83% of the 60 auctions that they arranged resulted in a winner paying more for the coin
than its purchase value.
Another form of bounded rationality is a limited mental-accounting ability. As noted
above, Hossain and Morgan (2006) investigate the sensitivity of online shoppers to the
breakdown of an item’s price between its direct cost and the shipping and handling
cost. Rational shoppers should be indifferent to the breakdown conditional on the total
cost. By randomly varying the components in a natural online auction setting, the authors
demonstrate that charging a larger shipping cost leads to greater revenues for the seller.
They also show how this case of bounded rationality can be partially attributed to loss
aversion.
List and Haigh (2005) employ a framed ﬁeld experiment to investigate the prevalence
of the Allais paradox among professional traders at the Chicago Board of Trade. They
ﬁnd that professionals do indeed exhibit behavior consistent with the Allais paradox.
Anomalies such as this and Hossain and Morgan (2006) imply the availability of unrealized arbitrage earnings and hence the potential inefﬁciency of the market process.
List and Millimet (2008) also employ a framed ﬁeld experiment to study the prevalence of consistent preferences in a sports card market populated by children. They
ﬁnd that among children with experience trading, 38% exhibit preferences that violate
the generalized axiom of revealed preference (GARP).
Another example of such bounded rationality in markets can be found in Anderson
and Simester (2003), who explore consumer reactions to $9 endings on prices. They use a
natural ﬁeld experiment to partner with a retail catalog merchant by randomly selecting
customers to receive one of three catalog versions that show different prices for the same

293

294

Handbook of Field Experiments

product. By systematically changing a product’s price by varying the presence or absence
of a $9 price ending, they can explore various features of neoclassical theory. For
example, a baseball bat may be offered to all consumers, but at prices of $39, $34, and
$47 in each catalog version. Anderson and Simester (2003) ﬁnd a positive effect of a
$9 price on quantity demanded, large enough that a price of $39 actually produced higher
quantities than a price of $34. This ﬁnding is puzzling in that their data can reject the
theory that consumers turn a price of $34 into $30 by either truncation or rounding.
This ﬁnding gives hard evidence on an interesting topic and demonstrates the need for
a better theory of how consumers process prices, and more speciﬁcally, price endings.
The third deviation from the neoclassical model that we consider is social preferences,
whereby decision-makers have preferences over the outcomes of others, conditional on
their own outcomes. There are so many varieties of social preferences that the literature is
yet to offer a uniﬁed model. However, the models that have been studied have generated
a wide range of structural and reduced-form insights. These include pure altruism, warm
glow (Andreoni, 1990), inequity aversion (Fehr and Schmidt, 2001), reciprocity
(Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger, 2004), guilt aversion (Battigalli and Dufwenberg,
2007), and others.
Similar to the other behavioral anomalies, social preferences represent a breakdown of
the premises of the ﬁrst welfare theorem, and so in principle, they impede the ability of
the market to allocate resources efﬁciently. However, among the behavioral anomalies, a
distinguishing feature of social preferences is that in practice, they often offer a potential
solution to a coincidental market failure. For example, in a one-shot market setting in the
absence of external enforcement, a fear of fraud may prevent an efﬁcient exchange from
taking place; however, if both parties have a concern for fairness or justice, then the efﬁcient exchange may yet occur. This is an example of the theory of the second best (Lipsey
and Lancaster, 1956).
Result 2.3: A concern for fairness and other forms of social preferences are observed
in real markets though it is unclear whether it enhances or impedes the prospects for efﬁcient exchange.
One particularly rich vein of market ﬁeld experiments is studies of the gift exchange
hypothesis. Akerlof (1982) suggested that problems of asymmetric information, namely
managers’ inability to specify worker effort in contracts in a perfectly enforceable way,
can be attenuated by social preferences. By giving workers a “fair” wage in excess of
the market wage, managers can induce a “fair” level of effort, which exceeds the minimum enforceable level of effort, hence the expression “gift exchange.” While the original context is labor markets, the mechanism applies in many isomorphic settings, such as
the investment game (trust game; Berg et al., 1995).
Fehr et al. (1993) was the ﬁrst laboratory demonstration. Managers are paired anonymously with workers for one-shot interactions. Managers select the wage, it is reported
to their partners, and the workers complete the play by selecting effort. The efﬁcient

Field Experiments in Markets

outcome is high wage, high effort, but the Nash equilibrium (by backward induction) is
minimum wage, minimum effort. The authors detected a strong, positive relationship
between wages and effort, and they also observed average wages and effort well in excess
of their permissible minima. They attributed this to a combination of positive reciprocity
and inequity aversion.
Investigating social preferences in a ﬁeld experiment is challenging because, in the
presence of repeated interactions, it is difﬁcult to design an experiment that allows
researchers to distinguish between reputational concerns and social preferences as explanations of behavior (List, 2006a). In the laboratory, the high levels of experimenter control over the environment make it easy to circumvent the problem as the experimenter
can create a one-shot environment, as in Fehr et al. (1993).
Gneezy and List (2006) offer one practical solution: focus on jobs where it is natural to
employ people once and for a short time period, and where the job differs sufﬁciently
from the workers’ long-term career plans that it is unlikely that they would seek a recommendation from the manager. The two jobs were library cataloguing and door-to-door
fundraising, and the recruitment pool was college students. The authors found results that
initially conﬁrmed Fehr et al.’s (1993) lab ﬁndingsdworker effort responding positively
to above-market wagesdbut that, over time, productivity reverted to the baseline level
associated with the market wage.
Other contributions to this volume (von Wachter) cover this literature in detail, as
Gneezy and List (2006) spawned numerous gift-exchange ﬁeld experiments. The review
by Fehr et al. (2009) conﬁrms that there is robust evidence of the presence of social preferences in labor markets, especially reciprocity. In some cases, the social preferences
clearly promote efﬁcient exchange by helping combat the problems arising from asymmetric information. In other cases, social preferences impede efﬁcient exchange. For
example Kube et al. (2013) mimic the design in Gneezy and List (2006) but they introduce an arbitrary wage cut. They ﬁnd that it leads to a persistent diminution of productivity due to a revenge motive. As Akerlof and Yellen (1990) speculated, and in the spirit
of Keynes (1936), this could be a source of involuntary unemployment at the macroeconomic level.
Anderson and Simester (2008) is a study of social preferences that is tangentially
related to the gift exchange literature. The authors collaborate with a mail-order catalog
ﬁrm to study the effect of allowing for the price of larger sizes of clothes to exceed that of
smaller sizes. They ﬁnd that a subset of customers regard such a pricing system as “unfair”
and react by substantially decreasing their purchases, a manifestation of negative reciprocity. Like Kube et al. (2013), this is an example of social preferences impeding an efﬁcient exchange.
Perhaps somewhat further removed from the gift exchange literature is the work that
explores identity and trading patterns in markets. For example, Bramoulle et al. (2010)
investigate the effect of relationship formationdthat is, of agents preferring to trade

295

296

Handbook of Field Experiments

with speciﬁc agentsdon market outcomes. In a series of simulations with agents of two
different types, they ﬁnd that more relationships develop in a model where agents learn
from round to round than in a model of random trading partner selection, that relationships make participants more likely to trade, and that relationships reduce overall surplus
by encouraging inefﬁcient trades. In experiments set at a sports paraphernalia exhibition
and at a ﬂea market, the authors ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant spontaneous (unprompted)
relationship formation, increased likelihood of extra-marginal buyers executing trades
(and a corresponding efﬁciency loss), and evidence of lower overall surplus for repeated
trades (i.e., trades within relationships).
Relatedly, Bulte et al. (2015) conduct Hawthorne markets with subjects in Sierra
Leone that have extraordinarily limited market experience (43% of subjects reported
buying or selling something more than once a week). The ﬁrst set of results looks at market outcomes when subjects engage with members of their village versus other villages.
Across these two treatments the authors ﬁnd lower levels of economic efﬁciency than
earlier work (measured as a percentage of predicted surplus). The second set of results
look at the variation in efﬁciency induced by the introduction of a middleman to act
as a negotiator for the buyer. The results show that efﬁciency rises when the middleman
is introduced, suggesting social norms around haggling are important for determining
market behavior in the sample.
Also along the lines of negative social preferences engendering inefﬁcient outcomes,
there exists a large ﬁeld experimental literature on discrimination, and it is the subject of a
chapter in this volume (Bertrand and Duﬂo). The deployment of ﬁeld experiments for
studying such phenomena is particularly instructive due to the socially unacceptable nature of discrimination; the scrutiny of an overt experiment would motivate subjects to try
extra hard to avoid appearing as if they discriminate, even if they do actually discriminate
in their day-to-day lives (Al-Ubaydli and List, 2015).
Although the excellent chapter by (Bertrand and Duﬂo) catalogues a variety of ﬁeld
experiments that test for discrimination in the marketplace, a brief overview of the
empirical approach is worthwhile to provide a useful benchmark (see also Riach and
Rich, 2002; List, 2006b). The work in this area can be parsed into two distinct investigation techniques: personal approaches and written applications. Personal approaches
include studies that have individuals either attend job interviews or apply for employment over the telephone. In these studies, the researcher matches two testers who are
identical along all relevant employment characteristics except the comparative static of
interest (e.g., race, gender, age). Then, after appropriate training, the testers approach potential employers who have advertised a job opening. Using various outcome measures,
the researcher then reports differences based on the variable(s) of interest.
Under the written application approach, which can be traced to Jowell and PrescottClarke (1970), carefully prepared written job applications are sent to employers who have
advertised vacancies. The usual approach is to choose advertisements in daily newspapers

Field Experiments in Markets

within some geographic area to test for discrimination. Similar to the personal approach
tests, care is taken to ensure that the applications are similar across several dimensions
except the variable of interest. One recent study that uses the written approach is due
to Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004b), who manipulate perception of race by randomly
assigning white-sounding or black-sounding names to resumes sent to various prospective employers in Boston and Chicago. They ﬁnd that the simple name manipulation
makes a large difference: the “white” applicant garners an interview request for every
eight resumes sent whereas the “black” applicant must send out 14 resumes to gain
one interview. Adding positive background information to both resumes exacerbates,
rather than attenuates, this difference.
More recently, when designing discrimination ﬁeld experiments, researchers often
seek to distinguish between the two major economic theories of discrimination: statistical
and animus. In the former, preferences remain neoclassical, and behavioral responds to
category (race, gender, sexual orientation, etc.) as the category carries statistically useful
information about factors that do directly affect proﬁts/utility, such as productivity, criminality, and so on. Setting aside moral considerations, this type of discrimination can help
grease the wheels of the market process as it denudes the difﬁculties associated with
imperfect information. In contrast, animus reﬂects negative social preferences, and so it
likely impedes efﬁcient exchange. Thus, for example, if bigotry prevents people with
long hair from entering the labor market, and 30% of the population has long hair,
then the foregone output is highly signiﬁcant.
Discrimination ﬁeld experiments therefore gauge subject responses to a vector of
observable attributes, where one dimensiondthe category being studied (race, gender,
etc.)dis varied randomly. To isolate animus, the vector of the remaining observable attributes includes the variables that the category is most plausibly proxying for, thereby
eliminating the category’s role as a statistical tool (List, 2004b). For example, if, hypothetically, employers discriminate against people with bushy eyebrows because they tend to
drive red cars, and driving a red car is bad for business, the researcher will present employers in the experiment with people who have bushy eyebrows and that manifestly
do not drive red cars, meaning that any residual discrimination toward them is the result
of animosity.
This kind of design is not perfect. First, it requires that the researcher can capture all
the statistical channels linking the category to pay off relevant information. In the bushyeyebrows example, perhaps the employer is worried about the potential employee having a second car. Second, it requires that the subjects are carefully considering all available
informations when making decisions. If they are boundedly rational and overwhelmed
with information (or are not paying attention), they may resort to statistically motivated
discriminatory heuristics even in the presence of information that renders the heuristic
redundant. Thus, in the bushy-eyebrows example, the employer may not notice that
the bushy-eyebrowed job candidate is driving a red car.

297

298

Handbook of Field Experiments

Studies employing the above technique have been used to study a wide array of
phenomena, such as employment (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004), vehicle sales
(List, 2004b), housing sales (Ahmed and Hammarstedt, 2009), and taxi rentals (Castillo
et al., 2012). While some, such as List (2004b), ﬁnd that observed discrimination in a
particular context is primarily statistical, whereas others, such as (Gneezy et al., 2012),
produce convincing evidence of animus. Hence, the discrimination literature contributes
to the broadly mixed conclusions on social preferences: they exist in the marketplace, and
they sometimes facilitate and sometimes impede efﬁcient exchange.
Finally, an extensive body of ﬁeld experimental evidence on social preferences in a
context slightly removed from conventional market scenarios is the literature on charitable contributions (List, 2009). For example, efforts at soliciting ﬁnancial donations in
a natural ﬁeld setting have consistently resulted in non-zero donations that cannot be
plausibly reconciled with reputational concerns masquerading as social preferences.
See, for example, List and Lucking-Reiley (2002), Landry et al. (2006), and Karlan
and List (2007).
The behavioral anomalies discussed above are by no means exhaustive; in the interests
of parsimony, we have examined the subset that we feel provide the best exposition of
the main results and that is most instructive.

3.5 Experience and behavioral anomalies
Laboratory experiments have amassed huge amounts of evidence of behavioral anomalies
within laboratory environments. The previous section surveys market ﬁeld experiments
and ﬁnds that there is considerable evidence of behavioral anomalies in ﬁeld settings too,
some of which impede the ability of markets to allocate goods efﬁciently. However, the
ﬁeld prevalence is certainly weaker than that found in the laboratory, and a closer examination suggests that this is at least partially systematic.
Result 3: There is evidence that some behavioral anomalies that impede efﬁcient exchange and can be observed in real markets diminish and potentially disappear with market experience.
This conclusion remains a considerable source of controversy because it falls into a
larger methodological debate about the desirability of laboratory versus ﬁeld experiments
(Levitt and List, 2007; Falk and Heckman, 2009; Al-Ubaydli and List, 2015), and, to
some extent, the even largerdand highly politicizedddebate over the efﬁcacy of decentralized markets as a mechanism for allocating resources.
As mentioned above brieﬂy, in his investigation of the endowment effect, List (2003)
found that its strength diminished with the market experience of the subject, and was
absent for the most experienced market professionals. List (2003) presents nonexperimental evidence that this is more likely due to treatment rather than selection, and
this is supported by the experimental evidence in List (2011a). Further evidence that

Field Experiments in Markets

professionals are systematically less loss-averse than college students is presented in List
and Haigh (2010), which is a test of options’ models. Notably, however, in Haigh and
List (2005), the same authors found that myopic loss aversion was more prevalent for professional traders than for college students participating in the same experiment, indicating
that the effect of market experience does not uniformly reduced the incidence of behavioral anomalies.
Despite detecting the Allais paradox among professional traders, using parallel experiments with college students, List and Haigh (2005) ﬁnd that it is weaker for professionals.
In their study of Bayesian decision-making in ﬁnancial markets, Alevy et al. (2007)
found that professionals were less likely to be Bayesian than college students, though it
did not affect their earnings. However, in certain settings, professionals exhibited a lower
propensity to be drawn into reverse cascades, which the researchers were able to attribute
to superior inferential capabilities. Moreover, unlike college students, Bayesianism
among professionals did not differ as the domain switched from gains to losses. Lending
credence to the causal role of experience in improving performance, in later rounds, like
professionals, college students began to harmonize behavior across gain/loss domains.
Further, the degree of Bayesian decision-making among professionals was also positively
correlated with the reported intensity of the professionals’ trading activity.
Along similar lines, in List and Millimet’s (2008) study of GARP violations among
children participating in sports card markets, the authors found that GARP violations
were signiﬁcantly lower among experienced traders, including experience that was
randomly assigned via a treatment that caused subjects to increase their trading activity.
In their study of the winner’s curse, as mentioned above, Harrison and List (2008) ﬁnd
that experienced traders assuming natural roles did not suffer from the winner’s curse.
These ﬁeld experimental ﬁndings follow in the footsteps of a large number of laboratory studies that ﬁnd that even within the laboratory, behavioral anomalies diminish
with the controlled experience that the subject is exposed to during their brief participation. For example, in their investigation of the endowment effect, Plott and Zeiler (2005)
discover that it disappears once paid practice rounds and feedback on elicitation methods
are introduced. They conclude that the previously observed endowment was more likely
the result of subject misconceptions rather than fundamental features of human preferences. Similarly, as mentioned above, Vernon Smith (1962) attributed the successful
equilibration of his double oral auctions, as compared to the failed equilibration of
Chamberlin’s (1948) decentralized markets, partially to the fact that subjects were able
to amass signiﬁcant experience on how to operate in a double oral auction.
The difﬁculty of running ﬁeld experiments in general, and in particular of mimicking
the precise structure of a speciﬁc laboratory experiment in the ﬁeld, means that the evidence on the interaction between experience and the incidence of behavioral anomalies
is limited. However, the conclusion that the majority of studies supportdthat professional experience diminishes the incidence of (and sometimes eliminates) behavioral

299

300

Handbook of Field Experiments

anomalies that impede efﬁcient exchangedshould not come as a surprise. After all,
impeding efﬁcient exchange is tantamount to leaving money on the table, either at
the individual or collective level. As such, all parties have an intrinsic incentive to actively
seek to rid themselves of their behavioral anomalies. One imagines that a stock trader
afﬂicted by the endowment effect will suffer below average earnings until they remedy
the situation.
Even if people are ignorant of their biases, or ﬁnd that they are incapable of doing
anything about them, the market imposes a selection force that will tend to weed out
the sufferers since they will have inferior trading performance. There is a rich mainstream
(Witt, 1986; Blume and Easley, 2002) and heterodox (Hayek, 1945) literature that argues
this point.

4. METHODOLOGICAL INSIGHTS
Due the inescapable breadth of the deﬁnition of a market, we have provided a necessarily
cursory review of the literature on ﬁeld experimental studies of markets. Despite the
disparateness of the studies considered, we believe that there are some central methodological insights that can be garnered.
Conclusion 1: Inducing preferences for all participants in a natural ﬁeld experiment
is currently impossible.
The leading insight that we take away from the literature is that at the moment, nobody has developed a way of truly inducing preferences (values) for all participants in a
natural ﬁeld experiment. If one relaxes the requirement that the preferences of all participants be induced, then confederates can provide a partial workaround. For example, in
List (2006a) and Castillo et al. (2012), a confederate with induced preferences is given
strict instructions on how to behave in the market, and remaining participants who are
unaware that they are participating have homegrown preferences. This allows the
researcher to study parts of the market process. However, the equilibrium and welfare
properties of the market cannot be studied due to the incomplete information on
preferences.
This means that while ﬁeld experiments such as List (2004a) represent a signiﬁcant
addition to the foundational work of Smith (1962, 1965), we are yet to open the black
box of demand and supply in a naturally occurring market and deﬁnitively observe what
is happening to demand, supply, actual prices, equilibrium prices, and surplus. The extensive literature on psychological priming (Bargh and Chartrand, 2000) gives us many suggestions on how to inﬂuence homegrown preferences covertly, thereby retaining the key
feature of a natural ﬁeld experiment, but the informational bar for testing the most
important theories of market economics require more than this. As such, we believe
that if scholars were to develop ways of precisely inducing preferences covertly in naturally occurring markets, then the intellectual returns would be massive.

Field Experiments in Markets

Accordingly, until such an advance is made, there remains a fundamental trade-off
when choosing between framed ﬁeld experiments and natural ﬁeld experiments to study
markets.
Conclusion 2: Scholars must be particularly careful when considering generalizing
laboratory experimental evidence on behavioral anomalies to natural market settings.
The generalizability debate is large enough to be studied separately (see the symposium at the end of Frechette and Schotter, 2015). One point that is worth making
without wading too deep into the broader debate concerns behavioral anomalies and
the market. By their very nature, markets are natural settings with enhanced ﬁnancial incentives, and they are characterized by evolutionary forces that aggrandize the inﬂuence
of actors who optimize well and generate surplus for themselves and others. Moreover,
the same forces diminish the inﬂuence of those that optimize poorly and fail to realize
surplus for themselves and others.
Consequently, scholars need to be very careful when they want to extrapolate behavioral anomalies from laboratory settings to ﬁeld ones. It is in professional trader’s interests
to avoid suffering from behavioral biases, meaning that we should be unsurprised to ﬁnd
that they suffer from them less than college students operating in low stakes, and low
experience laboratory experiments.
Social preferences are an exception to this very speciﬁc line of argument (though not
to the broader laboratory vs. ﬁeld debate) because they do not necessarily impede efﬁcient exchange, and in fact, they may promote it by compensating for the market’s
failings.
Conclusion 3: Distinguishing between social preferences and reputational concerns
in natural markets can be extremely challenging because of the difﬁculty of constructing
environments with zero reputational concerns.
As discussed above, depending upon the circumstances, social preferences can both
facilitate and impede efﬁcient exchange, meaning that there is much to be gained
from studying their prevalence in the marketplace. Researchers designing experiments
must be cautious when interpreting data as being supportive of the existence of social
preferences due to the specter of the Folk theorem: often, behavior that can be attributed
to social preferences can also be explained by reputational concerns.
Laboratory experiments can eliminate reputational concerns between subjects by
employing anonymity and perfect stranger designs. Such techniques are scarcely available
to ﬁeld experimentalists. Moreover, as List (2006a) demonstrates, seemingly innocuous
changes in background variables can have a big impact on the prevalence of reputational
concerns. In his study of the trust game in a natural ﬁeld experiment conducted at a sports
paraphernalia exhibition (executed with the assistance of confederates), List found that
whether or not traders were locally based, and whether or not there had been an
announcement and/or an implementation of third-party quality certiﬁcation, all had a
profound impact on the observed trustworthiness of traders. Examining the pooled

301

302

Handbook of Field Experiments

data suggests the presence of either weak social preferences or weak reputational concerns; parsing the data according to sources of reputational concerns that are obvious
to an industry-insider like Listdand not so obvious to a laypersondsuggests the absence
of social preferences.
As a reminder, we know from the huge charitable contributions’ literature that social
preferences exist, and have a signiﬁcant impact upon the economy. Conclusion 3 is not
about disavowing the existing of social preferences; rather it is about how careful one has
to be when attributing market behavior to them.
Conclusion 4: Researchers should make use of agent-based models to inform designs for market ﬁeld experiments, and to generate welfare prescriptions.
Theoretical models of conventional markets are currently signiﬁcantly less informative than theoretical models in other ﬁelds due to the difﬁculty of constructing a tractable
model. This is not for lack of tryingda substantial literature emerged in the 1980s
applying game theory tools to conventional markets in an effort to build upon the foundational analysis of Walras, and its contributors included some of the most illustrious
names in economic theory. Unfortunately, testable predictions could only be produced
in the most abstract of environments, meaning that empirically minded economists are
forced to rely on inductive methods to learn about markets, and econometric speciﬁcations are almost always in reduced-form. This is contrast to, for example, the auctions
literature, where rich structural models can be estimated, and sophisticated theories
tested.
With the advent of powerful personal computers, agent-based modeling has been
expanding in economics. However, to the best of our knowledge, it has been seldom
deployed for improving our understanding of conventional markets. Gjerstad and Dickhaut (1998) is an example of how agent-based modeling can plug some of the holes
resulting from the analytical intractability of conventional markets: the authors are able
to produce a model that better captures the price dynamics of double oral auctions
than previous efforts based purely on the Walrasian model.
Puzzlingly (to us), Gjerstad and Dickhaut (1998) have not led to a ﬂurry of follow-up
studies in spite of the rich intellectual returns that we associate with improving our understanding of markets. Their contribution predated the recent proliferation of ﬁeld experiments; as such, we regard building upon their work by combining agent-based
models with ﬁeld experimental methods as even more fruitful, and we encourage scholars
to make use of the available tools.

5. CLOSING REMARKS
Markets are the heartbeat of the economics profession yet we still know so little about
them. The best way for scholars to improve our knowledge of markets and the market
process is for us to combine the insights that can be garnered from all available sources:

Field Experiments in Markets

neoclassical theory, agent-based modeling, narrativeedeductive reasoning, laboratory
experiments, ﬁeld experiments, and naturally occurring data. In this regard, the study
of auctions is exemplary: all types of theoretical and econometric modeling, and all types
of data, have combined to deepen our understanding.
The difﬁculty of producing tractable theoretical models of markets means that we
have to squeeze the alternative sources of knowledge even harder. Accordingly, ﬁeld experiments have an enhanced role in developing our understanding of markets, and it is a
role that has been seized upon by the profession during the last 15 years.
In our review of the literature, we have arrived at three main conclusions:
1. Generally speaking, markets organize the efﬁcient exchange of commodities;
2. There exist behavioral anomalies that impede markets’ ability to organize efﬁcient
exchange; and
3. Many behavioral anomalies diminish and sometimes disappear when traders are sufﬁciently experienced, rehabilitating markets’ ability to organize the efﬁcient exchange
of commodities.
If scholars were able to produce a structural model of a market in disequilibrium and
to estimate using ﬁeld experimental data, thereby permitting welfare analysis of a market
in disequilibrium, we would regard this as a huge intellectual leap for the profession. At
the moment, this does not seem possible; we therefore urge the profession to more seriously consider agent-based models combined with ﬁeld experiments as an intermediate
step.
A ﬁnal remark concerns ﬁnancial markets. The small number framed ﬁeld experiments that have been conducted so far provide mixed evidence on the ability of ﬁnancial
markets to operate efﬁciently. Given the manifest importance of such markets to the
global economy, we urge the profession to forge greater links with professional traders
in order to facilitate more research in this vein.

REFERENCES
Ahmed, A.M., Hammarstedt, M., 2008. Discrimination in the rental housing market: a ﬁeld experiment on
the internet. J. Urban Econ. 64 (2), 362e372.
Ahmed, A.M., Hammarstedt, M., 2009. Detecting discrimination against homosexuals: evidence from a ﬁeld
experiment on the internet. Economica 76 (303), 588e597.
Akerlof, G.A., 1982. Labor contracts as partial gift exchange. Q. J. Econ. 97 (4), 543e569.
Akerlof, G.A., Yellen, J.L., 1990. The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment. Q. J. Econ. 105 (2),
255e283.
Al-Ubaydli, O.A., Boettke, P.J., 2012. Markets as Economizers of Information: Field Experimental Examination of the ‘Hayek Hypothesis’. George Mason University Working Paper.
Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A., 2015. Do natural ﬁeld experiments afford researchers more or less control than
laboratory experiments? Am. Econ. Rev. 105 (5), 462e466.
Al-Ubaydli, O., Houser, D., Nye, J., Paganelli, M.P., Pan, X.S., 2012. The causal effect of market priming
on trust: an experimental investigation using randomized control. PLoS One 8 (3), e55968.
Alevy, J.E., Haigh, M.S., List, J.A., 2007. Information cascades: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment with ﬁnancial market professionals. J. Finance 62 (1), 151e180.

303

304

Handbook of Field Experiments

Andersen, S., Brandon, A., List, J.A., Gneezy, U., 2014. Toward an Understanding of Reference-Dependent
Labor Supply: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 20695.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2008. Does demand fall when customers perceive that prices are unfair? The
case of premium pricing for large sizes. Mark. Sci. 27 (3), 492e500.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D., 2003. Effects of $9 price endings on retail sales: evidence from ﬁeld
experiments. Quantitative Mark. Econ. 1 (1), 93e110.
Andreoni, J., 1990. Impure altruism and donations to public goods: a theory of warm-glow giving. Econ. J.
100 (401), 464e477.
Apicella, C.L., Azevedo, E.M., Christakis, N.A., Fowler, J.H., 2014. Evolutionary origins of the endowment
effect: evidence from hunter-gathers. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (6), 1793e1805.
Bargh, J.A., Chartrand, T.L., 2000. The mind in the middle. In: Handbook of Research Methods in Social
and Personality Psychology, pp. 253e285.
Battigalli, P., Dufwenberg, M., 2007. Guilt in games. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (2), 170e176.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., McCabe, K., 1995. Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games Econ. Behav. 10 (1),
122e142.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2004a. Are Emily and Brendan more employable than Latoya and Tyrone?
Evidence on racial discrimination in the labor market from a large randomized experiment. Am. Econ.
Rev. 94 (4), 991e1013.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S, 2004b. Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A ﬁeld
experiment on labor market discrimination. Am. Econ. Rev. 94 (4), 991e1013.
Bertrand, M., Karlan, D.S., Mullainathan, S., Shaﬁr, E., Zinman, J., 2010. What’s advertising content worth?
Evidence from a consumer credit marketing ﬁeld experiment. Q. J. Econ. 125 (1), 263e306.
Bikchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., Welch, I., 1992. A theory of fads, fashion, custom, and cultural change as
information cascades. J. Political Econ. 100 (5), 992e1026.
Blume, L., Easley, D., 2002. Optimality and natural selection in markets. J. Econ. Theory 107 (1), 95e135.
Boettke, P.J., 2012. Living Economics. The Independent Institute, Oakland, CA.
Boettke, P.J., Candela, R., 2014. Hayek, Leoni, and Law as the ﬁfth factor of production. Atl. Econ. J. 42 (2),
123e131.
Boettke, P.J., O’Donnell, K.W., 2013. The failed appropriation of F.A. Hayek by formalist economics. Crit.
Rev. A J. Polit. Soc. 25 (3e4), 305e341.
Boettke, P.J., Coyne, C.J., Leeson, P.T., 2014. 12. Hayek versus the neoclassicists: lessons from the socialist
calculation debate. In: Elgar Companion to Hayekian Economics, 278.
Bramoulle, Y., List, J.A., Price, M.K., 2010. Buyer-Seller Relationships under Perfect Information. University of Tennessee Working Paper.
Brown, J., Morgan, J., 2009. How much is a dollar worth? Tipping versus equilibrium coexistence on
competing online auction sites. J. Political Econ. 117 (4), 668e700.
Bulte, E., Andreas, K., List, J.A., Turley, T., Voors, M., 2015. From Personalized Exchange towards Anonymous Trade: A Field Experiment on the Workings of the Invisible Hand. BYU Working Paper.
Carpenter, J., Holmes, J., Matthews, P., 2008. Charity auctions: a ﬁeld experiment. Econ. J. 118 (1),
92e113.
Castillo, M., Petrie, R., Torero, M., Vesterlund, L., 2012. Gender Differences in Bargaining Outcomes: A
Field Experiment on Discrimination. National Bureau of Economic Research No. 18093.
Celen, B., Kariv, S., 2004. Observational learning under imperfect information. Games Econ. Behav. 47,
72e86.
Chamberlin, E.H., 1948. An experimental imperfect market. J. Political Econ. 56 (2), 95e108.
Cipriani, M., Guarino, A., 2009. Herd behavior in ﬁnancial markets: an experiment with ﬁnancial market
professionals. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 7 (1), 206e233.
Coppinger, V.M., Smith, V.L., Titus, J.A., 1980. Incentive behavior in English, Dutch and sealed-bid
auctions. Econ. Inq. 18 (1), 1e22.
Diamond, P.A., Hausman, J.A., 1994. Contingent valuation: is some number better than no number? J.
Econ. Perspect. 8 (4), 45e64.
Drehmann, M., Oechssler, J., Roider, A., 2004. Herding and contrarian behavior in ﬁnancial markets: an
internet experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (5), 1403e1426.

Field Experiments in Markets

Drehmann, M., Oechssler, J., Roider, A., 2007. Herding with and without payoff externalitiesdan internet
experiment. Int. J. Industrial Organ. 25 (2), 391e415.
Dufwenberg, M., Kirchsteiger, G., 2004. A theory of sequential reciprocity. Games Econ. Behav. 47 (2),
268e298.
Ely, J., Hossain, T., 2009. Sniping and squatting in auction markets. Am. Econ. J. Microeconomics 1 (2), 68e94.
Engelmann, D., Hollard, G., 2010. Reconsidering the effect of market experience on the ’endowment
effect’. Econometrica 78 (6), 2005e2019.
Ericson, K.M.M., Fuster, A., 2014. The endowment effect. Annu. Rev. Econ. 6 (1), 555e579.
Falk, A., Heckman, J.J., 2009. Lab experiments are a major source of knowledge in the social sciences.
Science 326 (5952), 535e538.
Fehr, E., Gachter, S., 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415, 137e140.
Fehr, E., Goette, L., 2007. Do workers work more if wages are high? Evidence from a randomized ﬁeld
experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (1), 298e317.
Fehr, E., Schmidt, K.M., 2001. Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity e Evidence and Economic Applications. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2703.
Fehr, E., Goette, L., Zehnder, C., 2009. A behavioral account of the labor market: the role of fairness
concerns. Annu. Rev. Econ. 1, 355e384.
Fehr, E., Kirchsteigher, G., Riedl, A., 1993. Does fairness prevent market clearing? An experimental
investigation. Q. J. Econ. 108 (2), 437e459.
Frechette, G.R., Schotter, A., 2015. Handbook of Experimental Economic Methodology. Oxford University
Press.
Fryer, R.G., Levitt, S.D., List, J., Sadoff, S., 2012. Enhancing the Efﬁcacy of Teacher Incentives Through
Loss Aversion: a Field Experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 18237.
Gjerstad, S., Dickhaut, J., 1998. Price formation in double auctions. Games Econ. Behav. 22 (1), 1e29.
Gneezy, U., List, J.A., 2006. Putting behavioral economics to work: testing for gift exchange in labor markets
using ﬁeld experiments. Econometrica 74 (5), 1365e1384.
Gneezy, U., List, J., Price, M., 2012. Toward an Understanding of Why People Discriminate: Evidence from
a Series of Field Experiments. NBER working paper.
Gode, D.K., Sunder, S., 1993. Allocative efﬁciency of markets with zero-intelligence traders: market as a
partial substitute for individual rationality. J. Political Econ. 119e137.
Goette, L., Huffman, D., Fehr, E., 2004. Loss aversion and labor supply. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 2 (2e3),
216e228.
Grether, D., Porter, D., Shum, M., 2015. Cyber-shilling in automobile auctions: evidence from a ﬁeld
experiment. Am. Econ. J. Microeconomics 7 (3), 85e103.
Haigh, M.S., List, J.A., 2005. Do professional traders exhibit myopic loss Aversion? And experimental
analysis. J. Finance 60 (1), 523e534.
Harrison, G.W., List, J.A., 2008. Naturally occurring markets and exogenous laboratory experiments: a case
study of the winner’s curse. Econ. J. 118 (528), 822e843.
Harrison, G.W., List, J.A., 2004. Field experiments. J. Econ. Literature 42 (4), 1009e1055.
Haushofer, J., Zurlinden, N., 2013. Market Convergence and Equilibrium in a Kenyan Information
Settlement. Princeton Working Paper.
Hayek, F.A., 1945. The use of knowledge of society. Am. Econ. Rev. 35 (4), 519e530.
Hodgson, G.M., 2008. Markets. In: The Elgar Companion to Social Economics.
Hong, J.T., Plott, C.R., 1982. Rate ﬁling policies for inland water transportation: an experimental approach.
Bell J. Econ. 13 (1), 1e19.
Hossain, T., List, J.A., 2012. The behavioralist visits the factory: increasing productivity using simple framing
manipulations. Manag. Sci. 58 (12), 21e51.
Hossain, T., Morgan, J., 2006. Plus shipping and handling: revenue (non) equivalence in ﬁeld experiments
on eBay. The B.E. J. Econ. Analysis Policy 5 (2), 1e30.
Hou, J., Kuzma, A., Kuzma, J., 2009. Winner’s curse or adverse selection in online auctions: the role of quality uncertainty and information disclosure. J. Electron. Commer. Res. 10 (3), 144e154.
Jin, G., Kato, A., 2006. Price, quality, and reputation: evidence from an online ﬁeld experiment. RAND J.
Econ. 37 (4), 983e1005.

305

306

Handbook of Field Experiments

Jowell, R., Prescott-Clarke, P., 1970. Racial discrimination and white-collar workers in Britain. Race 11,
397e417.
Joyce, P., 1984. The Walrasian tantonnement mechanism and information. RAND J. Econ. 15 (3),
416e425.
Kagel, J.H., Levin, D., 1986. The winner’s curse and public information in common value auctions. Am.
Econ. Rev. 76 (5), 894e920.
Kagel, J., Levin, D., 2014. Auctions: A Survey of Experimental Research (working paper).
Kagel, J.H., Roth, A.E., 1997. Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Karlan, D., List, J.A., 2007. Does price matter in charitable giving? Evidence from a large-scale natural ﬁeld
experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (5), 1774e1793.
Karlan, D., Valdivia, M., 2011. Teaching entrepreneurship: impact of business training on microﬁnance clients and institutions. Rev. Econ. Statistics 93 (2), 510e527.
Katkar, R., Reiley, D.H., 2006. Public versus secret reserve prices in eBay auctions: results from a Pokemon
ﬁeld experiment. B.E. J. Econ. Analysis Policy 6 (2). Advances Article 7. http://www.bepress.com/
bejeap/advances/vol6/iss2/art7.
Keynes, J.M., 1936. The General Theory of Interest, Employment and Money. Palgrave Macmillan,
London, UK.
Knetsch, J.L., 1989. The endowment effect and evidence of nonreversible indifference curves. Am. Econ.
Rev. 79 (5), 1277e1284.
Kube, S., Marechal, M.A., Puppe, C., 2013. Do wage cuts damage work morale? Evidence from a natural
ﬁeld experiment. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 11 (4), 853e870.
Landry, C.E., Lange, A., List, J.A., Price, M.K., Rupp, N.G., 2006. Toward an understanding of the economics of charity: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Q. J. Econ. 121 (2), 747e782.
Levitt, S.D., List, J.A., 2007. What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about the
real world? J. Econ. Perspect. 21 (2), 153e174.
Lipsey, R.G., Lancaster, K., 1956. The general theory of second best. Rev. Econ. Stud. 24 (1), 11e32.
List, J.A., 2003. Does market experience eliminate market anomalies? Q. J. Econ. 118, 47e71.
List, J.A., 2004a. Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory: evidence from the marketplace. Econometrica
72 (2), 615e625.
List, J.A., 2004b. The nature and extent of discrimination in the marketplace: evidence from the ﬁeld. Q. J.
Econ. 119 (1), 49e89.
List, J.A., 2006a. The behavioralist meets the market: measuring social preferences and reputation effects in
actual transactions. J. Political Econ. 114 (1), 1e37.
List, J.A., 2006b. Field experiments: a bridge between lab and naturally occurring data. Adv. Econ. Analysis
Policy 6 (2). Article 2.
List, J.A., 2009. Social preferences: some thoughts from the ﬁeld. Annu. Rev. Econ. 1, 563e579.
List, J.A., 2011a. Does market experience eliminate market anomalies? The case of exogenous market
experience. Am. Econ. Rev. 101 (3), 313e317.
List, J.A., 2011b. Why economists should conduct ﬁeld experiments and 14 tips for pulling one off. J. Econ.
Perspect. 25 (3), 3e15.
List, J.A., Haigh, M.S., 2005. A simple test of expected utility theory using professional traders. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102 (3), 945e948.
List, J.A., Haigh, M.S., 2010. Investment under uncertainty: testing the options model with professional
traders. Rev. Econ. Statistics 92 (4), 974e984.
List, J., Lucking-Reiley, D., 2000. Demand reduction in multiunit auctions: evidence from a sportscard ﬁeld
experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 90 (4), 961e972.
List, J.A., Lucking-Reiley, D., 2002. The effects of seed money and refunds on charitable giving: experimental evidence from a university capital campaign. J. Political Econ. 110 (1), 215e233.
List, J.A., Millimet, D.L., 2008. The market: catalyst for rationality and ﬁlter of irrationality. B.E. J. Econ.
Analysis Policy 8 (1), 1e55.
List, J.A., Price, M.K., 2006. On the Fragility of Collusive Arrangements: Evidence from Field Experiments.
University of Nevada Reno Working Paper.

Field Experiments in Markets

Lucking-Reiley, D., 1999. Using ﬁeld experiments to test equivalence between auction formats: magic on
the internet. Am. Econ. Rev. 89 (5), 1063e1080.
Miller, R.M., 2013. A General Model of Convergence for Competitive Markets. State University of New
York at Albany Working Paper.
Ostrovsky, M., Schwarz, M., 2011. Reserve prices in internet advertising auctions: a ﬁeld experiment. In:
ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pp. 59e60.
Plott, C.R., 1986. Rational choice and experimental markets. J. Business 59 (4), S301eS327.
Plott, C.R., Zeiler, K., 2005. The willingness to pay-willingness to accept gap, the “endowment effect,”
subject misconceptions, and experimental procedures for eliciting valuations. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (3),
530e545.
Plott, C.R., Zeiler, K., 2007. Asymmetries in exchange behavior incorrectly interpreted as evidence of prospect theory. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (4), 1449e1466.
Resnick, P., Zeckhauser, R., Swanson, J., Lockwood, K., 2006. The value of a reputation on eBay: a
controlled experiment. Exp. Econ. 9, 79e101.
Riach, P.A., Rich, J., 2002. Field experiments of discrimination in the market place. Econ. J. 112,
F480eF518.
Smith, V.L., 1962. An experimental study of competitive market behavior. J. Political Econ. 70 (2),
111e137.
Smith, V.L., 1965. Experimental auction markets and the Walrasian hypothesis. J. Political Econ. 73 (4),
387e393.
Smith, V.L., 1982. Microeconomic systems as an experimental science. Am. Econ. Rev. 72 (5), 923e955.
Smith, V.L., Suchanek, G.L., Williams, A.W., 1988. Bubbles, crashes, and endogenous expectations in
experimental spot asset markets. Econometrica 56 (5), 1119e1151.
Waichman, I., Ness, C., 2012. Farmers’ performance and subject pool effect in decentralized bargaining
markets. Econ. Lett. 115 (3), 366e368.
Walras, L., 1874. Elements D’Economie Politique Pure. Rouge, Lausanne.
Witt, U., 1986. Firms’ market behavior under imperfect information and economic natural selection. J.
Econ. Behav. Organ. 7, 265e290.

307

