[Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Dummy Endogenous Regressors:
Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice]: Reply
Author(s): Joshua D. Angrist
Source: Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Jan., 2001), pp. 27-28
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392537
Accessed: 07-03-2019 22:29 UTC
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392537?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Business & Economic Statistics

This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Angrist:

the

Reply

27

ADDITIONAL
REFERENCES
article
suggest

observables"

estimat
Cox, D. R. (1958), The Planning of Experiments, New York: Wiley.
weighting
scheme.
Fisher, R. A. (1935), Design of Experiments, London: Oliver and Boyd.
because
failure
to
t
Heckman, J. J. (1997), "Instrumental Variables: Evidence
From Evaluating
very
different
esti
Job Training Programme," Journal of Human Resources,
32, 441-462.
Heckman, J.,
Ichimura, H., and Todd,
P. (1997), "Matching as an
Econometric
estimator
of
the
pa
Evaluation Estimator:discusse
Theory and Evidence on its Performance Applied
Todd
(1998)
to the JTPA Program, Part I. Theory and Methods," Review of Economi
cult
to
implement
a
Studies, 64, 605-654.
Finally,
the
append
(1998), "Matching as an Econometric Evaluation," Review of Ecoobtaining
estimates
nomic Studies,
65, 261-294.
to
inconsistent
esti
Heckman, J., and Vytlacil, E. (2000), "Causal Parameters,
Structural Equa
tions, Treatment Effects and Randomized Evaluations
of Social Programs,"i
approximations
or
unpublished
manuscript, University
of Chicago, Dept. of Economics.
fulness.
I
do
think

based

on

standard

(in press), "Local Instrumental Variables," in Nonlinear Statistical

simple

IV

Inference: Essays in Honor of Takeshi Amemiya, eds. C. Hsiao, K
errors
that

Morimune, and J. Powell, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

estimated
paramete
Ichimura, H. (1993), "Semiparametric Least Squares (SLS) and Weighted SL
in
reporting
incorre
Estimation of Single Index Models,"
Journal of Econometrics, 58, 71-120
that
it
saves
time
i
Neyman, J. (1923), "Statistical Problems
in Agricultural Experiments," Sup
plement to the Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, 2, 107-180.
several
works
long
W. (1984), "A Methodsolving
of Moments Interpretation of Sequential Est
ple
waysNewey,of
mators," Economic Letters, 14, 201-206.
1984).
Although
th
Roy, A. (1951), "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford
developed
in
the
th
Economic Papers, 3, 135-146.
mators
as
this

used
in
the
Rubin, D. (1978), "Baysian Inference
for Causal Effects:
The Role of Ranarticle
supp
domization," The Annals of Statistics, 6, 34-58.

Reply
Joshua D. ANGRIST
I thank the discussants and the session organizer, outgoing
the notion that observational studies should try to mimic the
JBES editor Jeff Wooldridge, who will be missed by associate
sort of controlled comparisons generated by experiments.
editors and JBES authors alike. The comments in this session Imbens. Imbens begins by endorsing the view that the sub-

offer a variety of viewpoints, some sympathetic, others more
stantive goals of empirical research are better served by the
critical. I am pleased to be part of this stimulating and conpotential outcomes/causal framework than by structural modstructive exchange and look forward to more interaction of
eling. Going one step further, Imbens notes that the problems
this type in the future.
with "model-first econometrics" are not limited to LDV's. In

Hahn. My article starts by suggesting that a focus the
on same spirit, he sensibly wonders (as did Wooldridge 1992)
treatment effects simplifies the problem of causal inference
why so much attention has been devoted to estimating the
in limited dependent variable (LDV) models with endogeBox-Cox transformation model, which does not actually idennous regressors. Endogeneity's half-sister is the assumption
tify E[YIX] without a distributional assumption. Imbens also
of unobserved individual effects, since the omitted-variables
nicely articulates the rationale for looking at the twins exam-

motivation for fixed effects in panel data is similar. Hahn

ple and notes that this is similar to the rationale for extrapasks whether a shift in focus from index parameters to averolating from clinical trials in narrow subpopulations. And, in
age causal effects might also simplify the notoriously diffifact, I believe the "twins experiment" is likely to have precult problem of working with nonlinear models for binary
dictive value in a variety of situations, though any extrapo-

panel data (e.g., as in Card and Sullivan 1988). Hahn shows

lation will probably be improved by control for demographic
that here too the causal-effects framework pays off, demoncharacteristics.
strating that average causal effects are easily estimated in a
In spite of (or perhaps because of!) our years of discussion
fixed-effects probit model with a binary regressor even though
and collaboration, Imbens and I still do not agree on certain
the probit coefficient is not. A second noteworthy feature
things. He feels strongly that inference with discrete outcomes
of Hahn's comment is his observation that identification in
should use models and procedures that respect inherent nonthis framework turns on careful modeling of the relationship
between the assignment variable and the fixed effects. Traditional econometric models are primarily concerned with the
? 2001 American Statistical Association
stochastic process generating outcomes. A shift of attention
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics
toward modeling the assignment mechanism is consistent with
January 2001, Vol. 19, No. 1
This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

28 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, January 2001
linearities. The HIRZ procedure discussed
in that
his
comment
is
of utilitarian trade-off
underlies
the choice of empirical
an intriguing way to do this, andstrategy.
my On
article
one hand, we
discusses
would like our models
others.
to be consistent with
any functional form restrictions
to be true.
I remain unconvinced, however, that
nonlinearity
is ofknown
major
On thework
other, attempts
at thisbinary
may complicate
estimation and
substantive importance in empirical
with
regresinference,
for little payoff.
Worst ofbe
all, the
technical
complexsors. The proof of the pudding, I
suppose,
would
to
show
that HIRZ or some of the methods I discuss in the article lead
ity of nonlinear models seems to cause authors to "wax econometric," an effort that may come at the expense of attention to
to better predictions or decisions than the linear workhorse.
substantive issues of importance (an example here is the long
Moffitt. Moffit provides a valuable counterpoint. He begins
series of papers discussing exactly how data from the RAND
by arguing that latent-index models have more predictive

health-insurance experiment should be analyzed). Mullahy's
power than reduced-form causal models. Such claims seem
heretical discussions of "one-part models," here and in earlier
hard to establish a priori, though I do not doubt that in some
work, represent a refreshing effort to keep the empirical train
cases this may be true. But empirical strategies in which the
on track. Mullahy's point that application-specific distribution
bulk of the research effort goes into estimating index coeffiordinates can provide more useful summary information than
cients may fail to answer the most basic question in empirical
quantiles is also clearly worth thinking about.
work: What happened here? Causal models and local average treatment effect (LATE) answer this question, while indexTodd. Todd provides a useful and clear overview of the

coefficients alone are not sufficient for causal inference. I

causal framework, which she suggests is better suited for

medical questions than economic questions. The thrust of her
agree, however, that structural modeling can be useful for
argument is that there is too much heterogeneity in economic
going beyond basic questions, and I have used index and other

interventions and outcomes for the causal approach to be
structural models for this purpose. Moffit is right, however,
very
in suggesting that I find the model-free analysis he refers to useful for economists. But my perception is that medical
research is even more explicitly concerned with heterogeneas "exploratory" more interesting than structural extrapolation.

ity than economics. This is evidenced by the many qualificaThis seems to me to be where the potential for real discovery
tions regarding patient characteristics, conditions, and interactions in medical treatment protocols. A difference between
Moffitt asks tough but fair questions about the twins appli-

lies.

the prevailing medical research paradigm and the traditional
cation. He is correct to point out that twinning is not a manipperspective, however, is whether the question of
ulable policy instrument. That is one reason I do not limit econometric
the
response is to be addressed by better theory
analysis to reduced-form effects of multiple births. Yet, toheterogeneous
my
or
more
evidence.
Of course, theory helps us decide where
mind, the best evidence we have on the controversial question

to look for heterogeneity, but as Rosenbaum (1999, p. 301)
of the consequences of out-of-wedlock childbearing comes

put it: "If a treatment has substantially different effects in diffrom the twins experiment (Bronars and Grogger 1994). And
the economic consequences of childbearing are of interestferent
in types of people, then we need to discover this (ital-

ics mine). Rosenbaum also noted that "randomized clinical

many other contexts. As noted in the introduction to my artitrials routinely look for heterogeneous treatment effects, and
cle, the twins experiment can help determine whether fertility

they do this without representative samples from national
reductions are responsible for trend increases in female labor
populations."
supply. Beyond this sort of question, the twins results seem
On the technical side, Todd suggests I advocated use of
useful for assessing the economic consequences of increased
the
abortion access in the United States, the dissemination of con-two-part model because it flexibly approximates nonlinear
functional forms for nonnegative outcomes. Although I noted
traceptive implants in developing countries (e.g., see Kane,
the flexibility, the upshot of my discussion was that the twoFarr, and Janowitz 1990), and various programs to encourpart model is poorly suited to causal inference because of the
age or require implant use by welfare mothers (Haveman and
difficulty of interpreting part 2. Finally, Todd points out the
Wolfe 1993).
failure to allow for sampling variance in the scaling factors
Finally, it is fair to question the external validity of twins
used to generate effects for nonlinear models. This is indeed a
estimates, as Moffit does toward the end of his comment.
hard-to-defend shortcut, though I shall take a stab at defense
Angrist and Evans (1998) showed that the labor-supply conby noting that randomness of the scaling factor, which typisequences of twinning can be reconciled with estimates of
cally estimates a sample average, is likely to be a minor source
the labor-supply consequences of childbearing resulting from
of sampling uncertainty.
a very different natural experiment induced by preferences for
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
mixed-sex sibling pairs. This suggests that results from both
experiments may be quite robust and may even be "structural"
Card, D. E., and Sullivan, D. (1988), "Effects of Subsidized Training
in the sense that they tell us something general about the ecoMovements In and Out of Employment," Econometrica, 56, 497-530.
Haveman, R., and Wolfe, B. (1993), "Children's Prospects and Childre
nomic response to childbearing.

Mullahy. Mullahy brings a welcome health economist's
perspective to the discussion. Health economists have long
grappled with the issues discussed in my article and, as

I hope I made clear, I drew ideas and inspiration from

Mullahy's work on models with nonnegative dependent variables. Mullahy's comment further highlights exactly the sort

Policy," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7, 153-174.
Kane, T., Farr, G., and Janowitz, B. (1990), "Initial Acceptability of Con
traceptive Implants in Four Developing Countries," International Fami
Planning Perspectives, 16, 49-54.
Rosenbaum, P. R. (1999), "Choice as an Alternative to Control in Observ
tional Studies," Statistical Science, 14, 259-304.

Wooldridge, J. (1992), "Some Alternatives to the Box-Cox Regressio
Model," International Economic Review, 33, 935-955.

This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

