Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables
Author(s): Joshua D. Angrist, Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 91, No. 434 (Jun., 1996), pp. 444455
Published by: American Statistical Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2291629 .
Accessed: 20/11/2012 12:24
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

American Statistical Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal
of the American Statistical Association.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Identification of Causal Effects Using
Instrumental Variables
Joshua D. ANGRIST,Guido W. IMBENS,and Donald B. RUBIN

We outlinea frameworkfor causalinferencein settingswhereassignmentto a binarytreatmentis ignorable,but compliancewith
the assignmentis not perfectso thatthe receiptof treatmentis nonignorable.To addressthe problemsassociatedwith comparing
subjectsby the ignorableassignment-an "intention-to-treat
analysis"-we makeuse of instrumental
variables,which have long
been used by economistsin the context of regressionmodels with constanttreatmenteffects. We show that the instrumental
variables(IV)estimandcanbe embeddedwithintheRubinCausalModel(RCM)andthatundersomesimpleandeasilyinterpretable
assumptions,the IV estimandis the averagecausaleffect for a subgroupof units,the compliers.Withoutthese assumptions,the
IV estimandis simply the ratio of intention-to-treat
causal estimandswith no interpretation
as an averagecausal effect. The
advantagesof embeddingthe IV approachin the RCMare thatit clarifiesthe natureof criticalassumptionsneededfor a causal
interpretation,
andmoreoverallowsus to considersensitivityof the resultsto deviationsfromkey assumptionsin a straightforward
manner.We applyour analysisto estimatethe effect of veteranstatusin the Vietnamera on mortality,using the lotterynumber
that assignedpriorityfor the draftas an instrument,and we use our resultsto investigatethe sensitivityof the conclusionsto
criticalassumptions.
KEY WORDS: Compliers;Intention-to-treat
analysis;Local averagetreatmenteffect;Noncompliance;Nonignorabletreatment
assignment;Rubin-Causal-Model;
Structuralequationmodels.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Economistsare typicallyinterestedin estimatingcausal
effectsratherthanmereassociationsbetweenvariables.Potentiallyinterestingcausaleffects includethe effects of educationon employmentandearnings,the effectsof employment trainingprogramson subsequentlabormarkethistories, and the effects of a firm's inputs on its output.The
dominantapproachto makinginferencesabout causal effects in economics over the last four decades is based on
structural equation models, which rely on the specification

of systems of equationswith parametersand variablesthat
attemptto capturebehavioralrelationshipsand specify the
causallinks betweenvariables.Goldberger(1972) andMorgan (1990) providedhistoricalperspectiveson these models, which dateback to Wright(1928, 1934) andHaavelmo
(1943, 1944). Inferencein structuralequationmodelsoften
exploits the presenceof instrumentalvariables(IV). These
are variablesthat are explicitlyexcludedfrom some equations and includedin others,and thereforecorrelatedwith
some outcomesonly throughtheireffect on othervariables.
Ratherthanrelyingon structuralequationmodels,causal
inferencein statistics,going back at least to workby Fisher
(1918, 1925) and Neyman (1923) on agriculturalexperiments, is fundamentallybased on the randomizedexperiment (see also Kempthorne1952 and Cox 1958). The basic notionin this formulation,which has been extendedby
Rubin(1974, 1978) to morecomplicatedsituations,including observationalstudieswithoutrandomization,is that of
potential outcomes.The causal effect of a treatmenton a
JoshuaD. Angristis AssociateProfessor,Departmentof Economics,
MassachusettsInstituteof Technology,Cambridge,MA 02139. GuidoW.
Imbensis AssociateProfessor,Departmentof Economics,andDonaldB.
Rubinis Professor,Departmentof Statistics,HarvardUniversity,Cambridge,MA 02138. The authorsthankGaryChamberlain,
CliffordClogg,
SanderGreenland,Judy Hellerstein,Paul Rosenbaum,the editor,an associate editor and severalreferees for comments,the NationalScience
Foundationfor financialsupport,and TomNewmanand NormanHearst
for sharingtheirdata.

single individualor unit of observationis the comparison
(e.g., difference)between the value of the outcome if the
unitis treatedandthe valueof the outcomeif the unitis not
treated.The targetof estimation,the estimand,is typically
the averagecausaleffect, definedas the averagedifference
betweentreatedand untreatedoutcomesacross all units in
a populationor in some subpopulation(e.g., males or females). For this definitionof causalityto be applicableto
sampleswith units alreadyexposedto treatments,we must
be able to imagine observingoutcomes on a unit in circumstancesotherthanthose to which the unit was actually
exposed.This approachis now widely used in statisticsand
epidemiology(e.g.,EfronandFeldman1991 andGreenland
andRobins1986),whereit is often referredto as the Rubin
CausalModel (RCM;Holland[1986]).
In this article we provide a link between these approaches,capitalizingon the strengthsof each.Earlierwork
combiningelements of these approachesincludes studies
by Hearst, Newman, and Hulley (1986), Holland (1988),
Permuttand Hebel (1989), SommerandZeger (1991), and
ImbensandAngrist(1994).We show how the IV estimand
can be given a precise and straightforward
causalinterpretationin the potentialoutcomesframework,despitenonignorabilityof treatmentreceived.This interpretationavoids
drawbacksof the standardstructuralequationframework,
such as constanteffects for all units, and delineatescritical assumptionsneededfor a causalinterpretation.
The IV
approachprovides an alternativeto a more conventional
intention-to-treat
analysis,which focuses solely on the average causaleffect of assignmenton the outcome(Lee, Ellenberg,Hirtz,and Nelson 1991).
As we show in the contextof a specific application,our
formulationof these assumptionsmakes it easier for researchersto judge whetheror not a causalinterpretation
of
the instrumentalvariablesestimandis plausible.Standard
? 1996 American Statistical Association
Journal of the American Statistical Association
June 1996, Vol. 91, No. 434, Applications and Case Studies

444

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin: Causal Effects and Instrumental Variables

IV proceduresrely on judgmentsregardingthe correlation
between functional-form-specific
disturbancesand instruments. In contrast,our approachforces the researcherto
considerthe effect of exposingunits to specifictreatments.
If it is not possible (or not plausible)to envisionthe alternativetreatmentsunderlyingthese assumptions,the use of
these techniquesmay well be inappropriate.
Moreover,by
separatinganddefiningthe criticalassumptions,ourformulation allows for a clear assessmentof the consequencesof
violationsof these assumptionsthroughsensitivityanalysis
undermore generalmodels. Our main results are summarized in threepropositions:the firstprovidesconditionsfor
a causal interpretationof the IV estimand,and the others
revealthe consequencesof violationsof the criticalassumptions.
We develop our presentationin the context of an evaluation of the effect of serving in the military on health
outcomes. Data for this study come from the Vietnam
era, when priorityfor conscriptionwas randomlyallocated
throughthe draft lottery.For expositorypurposes,and to
be precise withoutcumbersomenotation,we use the simplest possible example:both the "treatment"(i.e., serving
in the militaryor not, denotedby D) andthe "assignment"
(i.e., draft status, determinedby lottery number,denoted
by Z) are binary.If compliancewith the draft had been
perfect, then all those with a low lottery number(Z = 1)
would have served in the military (D = 1), and all those
with a high lotterynumber(Z = 0) would not have served

445

going backto workby Wright(1928, 1934),Schultz(1928),
and Haavelmo(1943, 1944).
A structuralequationmodel for the problemof inferring the effect of veteran status on a health outcome is
the dummy endogenous variable model (see, e.g., Maddala

1983; Bowden and Turkington1984; Heckmanand Robb
1985).For personi, let Yi be the observedhealthoutcome,
let Di be the observedtreatment(i.e., veteranstatus),and
let Zi be the observeddraftstatus.A standarddummyendogenousvariablesmodel for this problemwould have the
form
Yi = So + ol * Di + Ei,

(1)

D1 aoz+c

a.Zi+vi

(2)

Di{ D->0

iff

(3)

and
ifD* < 0

In this model 01 representsthe causal effect of D on Y.
Althoughsimple, this model is typical of the econometric
approachto discretechoice (in this case, the choice to serve
in the militaryor not).The latentindexformulationinvolving D* originatesin the notionthat complianceis a choice
determinedby comparisonof the expectedutility of serving and not serving.We note that this dummyendogenous
variablesmodel sharesmanyfeatureswith the classical simultaneousequationsmodel (Haavelmo1943):an underly(D = 0). We assume that we observe values of Z, D, and ing linearstructure,constantcoefficients,and a relianceon
the health outcome Y for each person. Our basic results, errortermsto characterizeomittedvariables.
however,are not limitedto this case with binarytreatment The first assumptiontypically invokedto identify 01 is
and binary instrument.The approachdevelopedhere can that Zi is uncorrelated with the disturbances Ei and vi:
be extendedto multi-valuedtreatmentsand instrumentsas
(4)
E[Zi *Ei] = 01
E[Zi *vi] = O.
in AngristandImbens(1995) andAngrist,GraddyandImbens (1995). Moreover,the generalizationto cases with co- The assumptionthatthe correlationbetweenE andZi is zero
variatesis, in principle,immediateby applyingour results and the absence of Z in Equation(1) capturesthe notion
at distinct values of the covariates.Also, fully principled that any effect of Z on Y must be throughan effect of Z
methodsof estimationusing likelihood-basedor Bayesian on D. This is a key assumptionin econometricapplications
techniquescan be derivedas in ImbensandRubin(1994a). of instrumentalvariables.A second assumptionis that the
In Section 2 we briefly describethe structuralequation covariancebetween the treatmentDi and assignmentZ2
approachto causalinferencein economics.In Section 3 we differsfrom zero;that is,
developan alternativeapproachbasedon the RCM,andthe
(S)
cov(Di, Zi) 34 ?,
approachesarecontrastedin Section4. In Section5 we discuss how to evaluatethe sensitivityof the IV estimandto which can be interpretedas requiringthat a,i differ from
two of the critical assumptionspresentedin Section 3. In zero. If Zi satisfiesthese two assumptions,then it is conSection 6 we apply this approachto our draft lottery ex- sideredan IV in this model.In generalDi, the endogenous
ample,where we formulatethe criticalassumptionsin the regressorin econometricterminology,is potentiallycorreRCM frameworkand investigatethe implicationsof viola- lated with Ei because the two disturbancesEi and vi are
potentiallycorrelated.This impliesthatthe receiptof treattions of these assumptions.
ment Di is not ignorable(Rubin1978) and,in econometric
terminology,not exogenous.
For this simple example,the IV estimatoris definedas
the ratio of samplecovariances(Durbin1954)
2. STRUCTURAL EQUATIONMODELS
IN ECONOMICS

FollowingGoldberger(1972), we definestructuralequation models as "stochasticmodels in which each equation
representsa causallink,ratherthana mereempiricalassociation"(p. 979). Such models arewidely used in economics,

IV = c

Li

Y%Z%/Z (1D-Z)
Z%
-

ThDZ%/Z'l Zi -

Y%(1-Z)/Z

Zi-1

D(1

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Zi/

-1

Zi)

(6)

446

Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996

where the last equalityfollows from the binarynatureof
the instrument.
Structuralequationmodelssuchas Equations(1)-(3) have
not found widespreaduse among statisticians.One reason
is the sensitivity of these models to critical assumptions
(see Little 1985) and their apparentinabilityto reproduce
experimentalresults(see Lalonde1986). Anotherreasonis
the fact that criticalassumptionsare cast in terms of disturbancesfrom incompletelyspecifiedregressionfunctions

tential outcomesused here can be viewed as analogousto
Neyman's (1923) notion of "potentialyields" in randomized agriculturalexperiments,as extendedby Rubin(1974,
1978, 1990, 1991)to observationalstudieswherethe potential outcomesare partiallyrevealedby a generaltreatment
assignmentmechanism,to situationswithpossiblevariation
of treatmentsandwith possibleinterferencebetweenunits,
and to Bayesianand likelihoodinferencewhere the potential outcomesand assignmenthave a joint probabilitydis(i.e., Ei and vi), rather than in terms of intrinsically mean- tribution.As originallyformulated,the potentialoutcomes
ingful and potentiallyobservablevariables.Typicallythe Di(Z) and Y (Z, D) are fixedbut unknownvaluespartially
researcherdoes not havea firmideawhatthesedisturbances observedthroughthe assignmentof treatmentsto units.Difreallyrepresent,andthereforeit is difficultto drawrealistic ferences in these potentialoutcomes due to assigned and
conclusionsor communicateresultsbased on theirproper- receivedtreatmentswill be revealedby analyzingdata obties. The focus of this articleis on the causalinterpretation tainedby randomlyassigningZ in the finite populationof
of the limit of the estimatorin Equation(6); that is, the N unitsunderstudy.Ourinitialgoal is to provideinferences
IV estimrand,using the potentialoutcomesframework,and solely aboutthis finite population.
In evaluationresearch,some assumptionsabouthowunits
on the formulationof the critical assumptionsin a more
transparentmannerto make these models more accessible interactandthe varietyof possibletreatmentsare required.
Our notationhas alreadyrestrictedboth Z and D to have
to statisticians.
only two levels; that is, there is no partial compliance. Here
CAUSAL ESTIMANDS WITH
INSTRUMENTALVARIABLES

3.

In this section,we set out an,alternativeframeworkfor a
causalinterpretation
of the IV estimandbasedon potential
outcomes.First,we discussthe RCMapproachto analyzing
the causaleffects of assignmenton treatmentreceivedand
on the outcome of interest (the intention-to-treateffects).
We thendefinethe causaleffectof interest,thatof treatment
received on the outcome, in terms of potentialoutcomes.
Finally,we showhow the IV estimandlinksthe two average
effects to a subpopulationaverageof the
intention-to-treat
causaleffect of interest.
3.1 The Rubin Causal Model

As before, Zi = 1 implies that person i has a low lottery number(i.e., would potentiallyget called to serve in
the military),whereasZa = 0 indicatesthat personi has a
high lottery number(i.e., would not get called to serve in
the military).The subsequentnotationfor D andY is somewhatdifferentfromthatin Section2 becauseof the need to
representpotentialoutcomes.Let Z be the N-dimensional
vectorof assignmentswith ith elementZi, andlet Di (Z) be
an indicatorfor whetherpersoni wouldservegiventhe randomly allocatedvector of draftassignmentsZ. In a world
of perfect compliancewith the draft, Di (Z) would equal
Zi for all i; that is, those with low lottery numberswould
actually serve and none of those with high lottery numbers would serve. In practice,Di (Z) can differfrom Zi for
variousreasons:individualsmay volunteerfor militaryservice, they may avoidthe draft,or they may be deferredfor
medicalor family reasons.
Similarto the definitionof Di(Z), we defineY2(Z,D) to
be the responsefor personi given the vectorof service indicatorsD and the vector of draftprioritiesZ; Y(Z, D) is
the N vectorwith ith elementYj(Z,D). We referto D2(Z)
and Y2(Z,D) as "potentialoutcomes."The conceptof po-

we follow the conventionin statisticsandmedicalresearch
by assumingno interferencebetweenunits.
Assumption 1: Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption
(SUTVA) (Rubin 1978, 1980, 1990).
a. If Zi - Z), then Di(Z) -Di (ZW).

b. If Z, = Zi and Di = D', then Y (Z, D) = Y (Z',DI).
SUTVAimplies that potentialoutcomesfor each personi
are unrelatedto the treatmentstatus of other individuals.
This assumptionallows us to write Y (Z, D) and Di(Z) as
Y%(Zi,Di) and Di(Zi) respectively.SUTVA is an important limitation,and situationswhere this assumptionis not
plausiblecannotbe analyzedusing the simple techniques
outlinedhere, althoughgeneralizationsof these techniques
can be formulatedwith SUTVAreplacedby otherassumptions.
Given the set of potentialoutcomes,we can define the
causaleffects of Z on D and on Y in the standardfashion
(Rubin,1974).
Definition 1: Causal Effects of Z on D and Z on Y
The causaleffectfor individuali of Z on D is Di(1)-Di (0).

The causaleffect of Z on Y is Y(1, Di(1)) - Yi(0,Di(0)).
In the contextof a clinical trialwith imperfectcompliance
these are the intention-to-treateffects, and we adopt this
jargonhere.
Although Bayesian or likelihood-based inference is
if treatmentassignmentis ignorable,even
straightforward
if not completelyrandom(Rubin1978),we assumerandom
assignmenthere to avoid tangentialissues.
Assumption 2: Random Assignment.

The treatmentassignmentZt is random:
Pr(Z = c)

=

Pr(Z = c/)

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin: Causal Effects and Instrumental Variables

447

for all c and c' such that tTc = TcT, where t is the N- a weakerversionof the exclusionrestrictionthatimposeredimensionalcolumnvectorwith all elementsequal to one. strictionsonly on outcomesthatcanpotentiallybe observed
(i.e., Yi(z, Di (z)).)

By virtueof Assumption3, we can now definepotential
GivenSUTVAandrandomassignment,unbiasedestimators for the average intention-to-treateffects can be ob- outcomesY(Z, D) as a functionof D alone:
tained by taking the differenceof sample averagesof Y
Y(D) = Y(Z, D) = Y(Z', D) V Z, Z' and V D,
and D classifiedby the value of Z; that is, by treatmentcontrolmean differences.This has been well known since and then by Assumption1 we can write Yj(Di) insteadof
at least Neyman (1923). Formally,the unbiasedestimator Yi(Z,D).
We now have notationfor the causaleffects of interest.
for the averagecausaleffect of Z on Y can be writtenas
Definition 2: Causal Effects of D on Y

Li zi

The causaleffect of D on Y for personi is Yi(1) - Yi(O).

Li(I - Zi)

i- Y. (1/N) EN1Z
(1/N) L_ YiZ.-(1/N)
(1/N) Zi=? Zi (1/N) z-1 zi
(1/N) ZiUZ= z(7)
and for the averagecausal effect of Z on D the unbiased
estimatorcan be writtenas
Ei Di Zi

E i Di (I -Zi)

Ei zi

Ei (I -Zi)

(1/N) I?> DiZi - (1/N) if1 Y (1/N) EN Zi
zi
(1N)
(1/N) i=z 1 /).Zi - (1/N)
(8)

The ratio of (7) and (8) equalsthe conventionalinstrumental variablesestimator(6). The limit of the IV estimator
(i.e., the IV estimand),thereforeequalsthe ratioof average
effects.
intention-to-treat
3.2

Instrumental Variables

The criticalfeatureof the problemof evaluatinga treatmentunderimperfectcomplianceis thateven if assignment
Zi is randomor ignorable,the actualreceiptof treatmentDi
is typicallynonignorable.Thereforethe differenceof outcome averagesby treatmentreceiveddoes not providean
unbiasedor even consistentestimateof the averagecausal
effect of D on Y. In fact, we requireadditionalassumptions
just to define the causal effect of D on Y in a meaningful
way. The following assumptionrequiresthe treatmentassignmentto be unrelatedto potentialoutcomesonce treatment receivedis takeninto account.

Althoughwe can neverobserveany of these causaleffects,
for people with Di(O) ; Di(1) we can observe either one
of its terms throughappropriatechoice of Zi. We therefore focus on averagecausal effects in groups of people
who can be inducedto changetreatments.Inferencesabout
suchaveragecausaleffects aremadeusing changesin treatment statusinducedby treatmentassignment,providedthe
assignmentdoes affect the treatment.
At this point we introducea compactnotationto denote
averagesover the entirepopulationor subpopulations.Let
E[g] denote the average over the populationof N units
of any function g( ) of Zi, Di(1), Di(O), Yi(O,O), Yi(O,1),
Yi(1,0), or Yi(1,1). Similarly,the averageof gQ()over the
definedby some fixedvalueho of some funcsubpopulation
tion h(.) will be denotedby E[glh(.) = ho]. Finally, the
relative size of the subpopulationsatisfying h(-) = ho is
written as P[h(.) = ho] = E[lh(.)=hj], where 1{.} is the
indicatorfunction.We emphasizethat this notationsimply
reflects averagesand frequenciesin a finite populationor
subpopulation.
The next assumptionrequiresZ to have some effect on
the averageprobabilityof treatment.
Assumption 4: Nonzero Average Causal Effect of Z on D.
The average causal effect of Z on D, E[Di(1) - Di(0)] is

not equalto zero.
The final assumptionthat we make, originallyformulated
by Imbens and Angrist (1994), says that there is no one
who does the opposite of his assignment,no matterwhat
the assignment.
Assumption 5: Monotonicity (Imbens and Angrist 1994).

Di(1) > Di(0) for all i =1,.. .,N.
Assumption3: ExclusionRestriction.

We refer to the combinationof Assumptions4 and 5, implying that Di(1) > Di(O) with inequalityfor at least one
unit as strongmonotonicity.
0 1.
This assumptionimpliesthatYi(1,d) = Yi(O,d) for d O,
Assumptions1-5 lead to our formaldefinitionof an inIt capturesthe notionunderlyinginstrumentalvariablespro- strumentin the RCM.
ceduresthat any effect of Z on Y must be via an effect of
Z on D. Because the exclusion restrictionrelates quantiDefinition 3: Instrumental Variablefor the Causal Effect
ties that can never be jointly observed,(i.e., Y,i(0,d) and of D on Y
Yi(1, d)), it is not directlyverifiablefrom the data at hand
althoughit has testableimplicationswhen combinedwith A variableZ is an instrumentalvariablefor the causaleffect
Assumptions1 and2. ImbensandRubin(1994b)discussed of D on Y if: its averageeffect on D is nonzero,it satisfies

Y(Z, D) = Y(Z', D) for all Z, Z' and for all D.

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

448

Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996
Table 1. Causal Effect of Z on Y, Yj(1, Dj(1)) - Yj(O,D1(O)),for the Population
of Units Classified by D1(O)and D1(1)
D1(O)

Di(1)

0

1

0

Y,(1, 0) - Y,(O,0) = 0
Never-taker

Y(1, 0) - Y,(O,1) = -(Y,(1) - Y,(O))
Defier

1

Y,(1, 1) - Y,(O,0) = Y(1) - Y,(O)
Complier

Y,(1, 1) - Y,(O,1) = 0
Always-taker

the exclusionrestrictionand the monotonicityassumption, This establishesthe relationshipbetween the IV estimand
it is randomly(or ignorably)assigned,and SUTVA holds and the causaleffect of D on Y, which we summarizeas a
formalproposition.
(i.e., if Assumptions1-5 hold).
3.3

Interpretingthe Instrumental Variables Estimand

Proposition 1: Causal Interpretation of the IV Estimand.

SUTVAandthe exclusionrestrictionare sufficientto es- GivenAssumptions1, 3, 4, and5, the instrumentalvariables
tablisha fundamentalrelationshipbetweenthe intention-to- estimandis
treateffects of Z on Y andD andthe causaleffect of D on
E[Yi(Di(l), 1) - Yi(Di(0), 0)]
Y at the unit level:
E[Di(l) - Di(O)]

Yi(1, Di(1))

-

= Y2(Di(l))

Yi(O,Di(O))
-

= E[(Yi(1)

Y2(Di(O))

= [Yi(1) *Di (1) + Yi (O) * (1 -Di
-

-

(1))]

Di(O)).

E[Di(1) - Di(0)] equals P[Di(1) - Di(0) = 1], and second,
that E[Di(1) - Di(0] differs from zero.
(9)

Thus the causal effect of Z on Y for person i is the product

of (i) the causaleffect of D on Y and (ii) the causaleffect
of Z on D. We can thereforewritethe averagecausaleffect
of Z on Y as the weighted sum of averagecausal effects
both with Di(O) + Di(l):
for two subpopulations,
E[Yi(1, Di(1))
= E[(Yi(1)

-

Yi(O,Di(O))]

-

Yi(0))(Di(1)

-

Di(O))]

= E[(Y%(I) - Y%(O))IDi(I) - Di(O) = 1]
* P[Di(I)
-

E[(Y%(I) - Y%(O))lDi(I)
* P[Di(I)

-Di(O)

-

Di(O) =-1]

-

Di(O) =-1].

= 1]

(10)

The weightsdo not sumto 1 butratherto P[Di(O) 4 Di(1)].
Equation(10) does not use monotonicity.The monotonicity assumptionrequiresthat Di(1) - Di(O) equals either
zero or one, so that the averagecausal effect of Z on Y
equalsthe productof the averagecausal effect of D on Y
for personswith Di(0) = 0 and Di(1) = 1 and their proportionin the population:
E[Yi(Di(1), 1) - Yi(Di (0), 0)]
=

E[(Y%(I) - Y%(O))Di(I)
.PriI

-

Di(O) = 1]
To
Di(O

X=o/
1]

Yi(0))IDi(1) - Di(0) = 1]. (12)

We call this the Local AverageTreatmentEffect (LATE).
This result follows directlyfrom (11) combinedwith two
facts: first, that the monotonicityassumptionimplies that

[Yi(1) Di(O) + Yi(O) (1 - Di(O))]

= (Yi(1) - Yi(O)) (Di(1)

-

(I 1 )

Table 1 helps interpretthis result. The four values of
(Di(0), Di(1)) in this two-by-twotable generatethree distinct values of Di(1) - Di(0). Individualswith Di(1)
- Di (0) = 1 (bottom left) are induced to take the treatment by assignmentto the treatment,and the causaleffect
of Z on Y is Yi(1)-Yi(0) for individualsof this type,whom
we refer to as compliers. A value of Di(1) - Di(0) = 0 (diagonalelements)implies that individuali does not change
treatmentstatuswith the assignedtreatment;the causaleffect of Z on Y is zero for such individualsby the exclusion
restriction. If Di(O) = Di(1) = 0, the individual is referred
to as a never-taker;or in our application,a draft avoider;
whereas if Di (O)= Di (1) = 1, the individual is an alwaystaker or, in our application,a volunteer.Finally,individuals
with Di (1) - Di (0) = -1 (top right) do the opposite of their
assignment;they are inducedto avoid the treatmentby assignmentto it, andinducedto take the treatmentby assignmentto the controlgroup.We call such individualsdefiers,
as suggestedby Balke and Pearl (1993) in a commenton
an earlierversion of this paper(Angrist,Imbens,and Rubin 1993).The causaleffect of Z on Y for these individuals
is Yi(O)- Yi(l). Finally,we refer to never-takers,alwaystakers,and defiersjointly as noncompliers.Note thatthese
labels-compliers, defiers,never-takers,always-takers,and
noncompliers-are simplydefinitionsgiven SUTVAin this
experimentand are not assumptionsabout individualbehavior.
By virtueof the exclusionrestriction,the two subpopulations correspondingto the two diagonalelementsof Table
1 are characterizedby a zero causal effect of Z on Y. By
virtueof the monotonicityassumptionthereare no defiers,

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin: Causal Effects and Instrumental Variables

andthe groupcorrespondingto the top-rightelementin the
table is empty.Finally,by virtueof Assumption4, the proportionof the populationin the cell correspondingto compliers differsfrom zero and is equal to the averagecausal
effect of Z on D. Combined,these assumptionsimply that
the averagecausal effect of Z on Y is proportionalto the
averagecausaleffect of D on Y for compliers.This is the
resultin Proposition1.
Because we can estimate the two intention-to-treatestimandsby virtue of randomassignment,we can also estimate their ratio; that is, the IV estimand.The ratio of
the usual unbiasedestimatorsfor the intention-to-treat
estimandsgiven in (7) and (8) is equalto the standardinstrumentalvariablesestimatorfor binaryinstrumentsgiven in
(6). This estimatordoes not exploit all the implicationsof
the model developedin this section. In Imbensand Rubin
(1994a,b)we discussimplicationsof this model for estimation.
Finally,it is importantto note that (underour assumptions) we cannotgenerallyidentifythe specificmembersof
the group of compliers, defined by Di(O) = 0, Di(1) = 1,
for whom we can identify the average treatmenteffect.
Thus, the local averagetreatmenteffect (i.e., the average
causal effect for compliers)is not the average treatment
effect for either the entire populationor for a subpopulation identifiablefrom observedvalues. Strongerassumptions are neededfor the identificationof averagecausaleffects for subpopulationsidentifiablefrom observed data.
One assumptionthatachievesthis is randomassignmentto
a control group denied treatment,so that Di(0) = 0 for
all i (Zelen 1979; Angrist and Imbens 1991). For examples of othersuchassumptionssee Heckman(1990),Robins
andTsiatis (1991),EfronandFeldman(1991), and Manski
(1994).
4.

COMPARINGTHE STRUCTURAL EQUATION
AND POTENTIALOUTCOMES FRAMEWORK

In Section 2 we describeda structuralequationmodel
for the effect of militaryservice on a healthoutcomeusing
an indicatorof drafteligibility as an instrument.Here we
contrastthat frameworkwith the approachdevelopedfor
the same problemin Section 3. In particular,we compare
the formulationandclarityof the assumptionsin each case.
This comparisonis useful becauseseveralauthorshave attributedthe absenceof structuralequationmethodsin statistics to the mannerin which such models are commonly
formulated.For example,in his discussionof the connection betweenstructuralequationmethodsandpathanalysis,
Goldberger(1972) quotedMoran(1961):"Themainreason
why Sewall Wright'smethodof path coefficientsis often
found difficultto understandis that expositionsof the theory do not makeclearwhatassumptionsaremade"(p. 988).
Similarly,Holland(1988) writes, "it is not always evident
how to verify assumptionsmade about [regressiondisturbances].For example,why should[they]be independentof
[Z] ... when the very definitionof [the disturbances]involves [Z]" (p. 458).

449

4.1 The Exclusion Restriction and Ignorable
Treatment Assignment

The econometricversion of these assumptionsrequires
that the disturbancesin the responseequation(1) and the
participationequation(2) be uncorrelatedwith, or independentof, the assignmentZ. In ImbensandAngrist(1994)this
assumptionis formulatedin a frameworkusing potential
outcomesindexedonly againstthe level of the treatmentD.
The frameworkwe develophere separatesthis requirement
into two assumptionsaboutpotentiallyobservablequantities: the exclusionrestriction,which says nothingaboutthe
treatmentassignmentmechanism,and ignorabletreatment
assignment,whichsays nothingaboutpossibledirecteffects
of assignment.
First, the exclusion restrictionrequiresthat the instrumenthaveno effect on the outcomeexceptthroughD. Thus
to verify this assumption,the researchermust consider,at
the unit level, the effect of changingthe value of the instrumentwhile holding the value-of the treatmentfixed.
To clarify the distinctionbetweenthis formulationand the
econometricformulation,considerthe four subpopulations
definedby the valuesof Di(O)and Di(1) in Table1. Someone with Di (0) = Di (1) = 1 would always serve in the
militarywith a low or high draftlotterynumber.It seems
reasonableto assumethat for such a person,the draftlotterynumberhas no effecton healthoutcome.Next, consider
someone with Di(O)

=

Di(I)

=

0, who would have man-

aged to avoid militaryservice with a high or low lottery
number.For someone exemptedfrom militaryservice for
medicalreasons,it seems plausiblethattherewas no effect
of the draft lottery number.But a draftee who managed
to avoid militaryservice by staying in school or moving
abroadcould experiencean effect of Z on futurelife outcomes thatwouldviolatethe exclusionrestriction.For both
these groupsof noncompliers,the exclusionrestrictionrequiresthe researcherto considera differencein outcomes
thatwerepotentiallyobservable,even thoughafterthe population was randomlyallocated to treatmentand control
groups,only one of the outcomeswas actuallyobserved.In
fact, if one couldidentifycompliersandnoncompliers,then
it wouldbe possibleto test the exclusionrestrictionby comparingaverageoutcomesfor noncompliersby assignment
status.
For compliers with Di(0)

= 0, Di(1)

= 1, the ex-

clusion restrictioncomparesoutcomesthat cannotbe observed: it requires that Yi(0,Di(0)) = Yi(1,Di(0)) and
Yi(I, Di(1))

=

Yi(O,Di(1)). For this group, the exclusion

restrictionamountsto attributingthe effect of Z on Y to
the change in the treatmentreceivedD ratherthan to the
changein assignmentZ. Such an assumptionis not innocuous, and efforts to ensure it form the rationalefor blinding, double blinding,and using placebos in clinical trials.
Nevertheless,it underliesmost experimentalevaluationsin
economicswhereblindingandplacebosareimpossible,and
is often thoughtto be reasonablein those cases.
The secondelementembeddedin the assumptionof zero
correlationbetween instrumentsand disturbancesin the
standardeconometricformulationis that of random,or at

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996

450

least ignorable,treatmentassignmentZ. This assumption
is trivially satisfiedif physical randomizationtook place,
as in the applicationin Section 6 where Z is a function
of a lotterynumber.Ourformulationmakesclear thatrandomizationof the instrument,thoughsufficientto allowunbiased estimationof the averagetreatmenteffect of Z on
Y and of the averagetreatmenteffect of Z on D, does
not imply that the IV estimandis interpretableas an average causal effect. In most applicationsof IV, however,the
instrumentis not randomlyassigned,and this assumption
must be arguedmore carefully.Examplesinclude Angrist
and Krueger's(1991) use of quarterof birth as an instrument for the effect of schoolingon earnings,Card's(1993)
use of distanceto college as an instrumentfor the effect
of schooling on earnings,and McClellanand Newhouse's
(1994) use of relativedistanceto hospitalas an instrument
for the effect of catherizationon mortalityafteracutemyocardialinfarction.
Whereasthe exclusionrestrictionrequiresthe researcher
to contemplatethe effect of specific treatmentson outcomes, the ignorabilityassumptionrequiresconsideration
of the assignmentmechanism.Violationsof these different
assumptionscan have differentsources and consequences.
In our view, pooling these assumptionsinto the single assumptionof zero correlationbetweeninstrumentsand disturbanceshas led to confusion about the essence of the
identifyingassumptionsand hindersassessmentand communicationof the plausibilityof the underlyingmodel.
4.2 The Monotonicity Condition

The monotonicityassumptionrules out the existence of
defiers, characterized by Di(0) = 1 and Di(1) = 0. Permutt

and Hebel (1989) informallydiscusseda variantof this assumptionin a reanalysisof a programdesignedto induce
pregnantwomen to stop smoking.In that context, the assumptionimplies that everyonewho would stop smoking
if they were in the control group, which received no encouragementto stop smoking,would also stop smokingif
encouragedto do so by beingin the treatmentgroup.Robins
(1989) discussedthe effect of this assumptionon boundson
populationaveragetreatmenteffects. Monotonicityis implied by designswherethose assignedto the controlgroup
are preventedfrom receiving the treatment,as in Zelen's
(1979) single-consentdesigns.
Monotonicityhas no explicit counterpartin the econometricformulation,but is implicitin the use of an equation
with constantparametersfor the relationbetween Zi and
Di. The model developedin Section 3 suggests that the
constantparameterassumptionembodied in (2) is much
strongerthan needed. On the other hand, it is not sufficient to postulatea nonzerocovariancebetweentreatment
and assignment,as in (5), for the interpretationof the IV
estimandas an averageof causaleffects.
4.3

to-treateffects underAssumptions1 and 2. The structural
parameter(01) is the averageeffect of the treatmentitself
on Y for the subpopulationthatcomplieswith assignment.
The econometricapproachdoes not distinguishbetweenan
effect for the entire populationand an effect for the subpopulationof compliers.In our view LATEis structuralin
the Goldberger(1972) sense of representinga causal link,
but not necessarilystructuralin the sense of representinga
parameterthat is invariantacrosspopulations.Despite this
potentiallack of generalizability,we. view LATEas interesting (perhapsin combinationwith the intention-to-treat
estimand)because it is an averageof unit level causal effects of the treatmentof interest.For example,for a potential recruit,the averageeffect of actualmilitaryservicefor
a specific subpopulationis likely to be of greaterinterest
thanthe populationaverageeffect of drafteligibility.
A similarrationaleappliesto clinicaltrials,whichare often based on populationsthat are morehomogeneousthan,
and not representativeof, the populationthat will eventually be subjectedto the treatment.The presumptionin such
cases, andin our analysis,is the averageover the subpopulation of those whose behaviorcan be modifiedby assignmentarelikely to be informativeaboutpopulationaverages
of those who complyin the future,even if thereis substantial heterogeneityin individual-levelcausaleffects.
It should be stressed, however, that the assumptions
neededfor a causalinterpretationof the instrumentalvariables estimand(Assumptions1 and 3-5) are substantially
strongerthanthose neededfor the causalinterpretationof
estimand(Assumption1). The plausithe intention-to-treat
bility of the additionalassumptions(i.e., the exclusionrestrictionand the monotonicityassumption)must be taken
into account when facing the choice to report estimates
estimands,of the IV estimands,or
of the intention-to-treat
both.
5.

SENSITIVITYOF THE IV ESTIMAND
TO CRITICALASSUMPTIONS

The assumptionslaid out in Section 3 are sufficientconditionsfor the identificationof a meaningfulaveragetreatment effect. In this section we discuss the sensitivity of
the IV estimandto deviationsfrom the IV assumptions.As
this discussionmakesclear,violationsof these assumptions
need not be catastrophic.We focus on Assumptions3 and5
becausethey formthe core of the IV approach.Assumption
4 (a nonzeroaveragecausaleffect of Z on D) is conceptuand easy to check. Assumptions1 and
ally straightforward
2 are standardin the RCMapproach,andsensitivityto particularviolationsof those assumptionshas been previously
discussed(e.g., RosenbaumandRubin1983).In generalthe
IV estimandis most likely to be sensitiveto violationsof
the exclusionrestrictionand the monotonicityassumption
when there are few compliers.In Section 6 we illustrate
how this sensitivityanalysiscan be applied.

Reduced Form and Structural Parameters

Reduced-formparametersfor the draft lottery applica- 5.1 Violations of the Exclusion Restriction
First, we consider violations of the exclusion restriction arethe coefficientsfrom a regressionof Y on Z andD
on Z. In our formulation,these are the averageintention- tion, while maintainingthe otherassumptions,stability,and

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

451

Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin: Causal Effects and Instrumental Variables

the productof the averagesize of the directeffect of Z for
noncompliersand the odds of noncompliancegiven monotonicity.The higherthe correlationbetweenthe instrument
(13) andthe treatmentstatus(i.e., the "stronger"
Hi = Yi(I, d) -Yi(O, d),
the instrument),
and
consequently
the
of
noncompliance,
odds
the
smaller
where d = 0 if subject i is a never-taker and d = 1 if subject
of the
is
to
violations
IV
estimand
the
the
less
sensitive
i is an always-taker.Underthe exclusionrestriction,Hi = 0
assumption.
exclusion
for all noncompliers.
strongmonotonicity.If subjecti is a noncomplier,that is,
Di(O) = Di(I), then the causaleffect of Z on Y is

Proposition2. Givenstabilityandstrongmonotonicity, 5.2 Violations of the Monotonicity Condition
but withoutthe exclusionrestrictionfor noncompliers,the
Next we considerviolationsof the monotonicityassumpIV estimandequalsthe LocalAverageTreatmentEffectplus tion. Because we maintainthe exclusion restriction,the
a bias termgiven by (14):
causaleffect of D on Y for personi with Di(1) 7&Di(O)is
still uniquelydefined,and equalto Yi(1) - Yi(0).
E[Yi(I, Di(1))
E[Di(1)
-

=

-

Yi(O,Di(0))]
Di(0)]

E[Yi(I, Di(1))

-

Yi(0, Di(O)) Ii is a complier]
P[i is a noncomp
MPlier]

E[Hi Ii is a noncomplier] P

P[i is a complier]

(14)

Proposition 3. Givenstability,the exclusionrestriction,
anda nonzeroaveragecausaleffect of Z on D, but without
the monotonicityassumption,the IV estimandequals the
Local AverageTreatmentEffect plus a bias term given by
(17):
E[Yj(1, Di(l))

-

Yi(O,Di(O))]/E[Di(1)

-

Di(O)]

- E[Yi(1) - Yi(0)Ii is a complier]
The bias of the IV estimandrelativeto the Local Average
TreatmentEffect equals the averagedirect effect of Z on
=-A~i\ {E[Yi (1) -Yi (0) i is a defier]
Y for noncompliersmultipliedby the odds of being a noncomplier.
- E[Yi(1) - Yi(0)Ii is a complier]},
(17)
When there is a direct effect of assignmenton the outcome for noncompliers,it is plausiblethat there is also a where
directeffect of assignmenton outcomefor compliers.SupP(i is a defier)
pose that for each complier,assignmentand treatmenthad
- P(i is a defier)
(1)
is
a
complier)
P(i
additiveeffects on the outcomeY; that is,
The bias due to violationsof monotonicityis composedof
Yi(1, O) - Yi(O,O) = Yi(1, 1) - Yi(O,1),
two factors.The first factor,A = P(i is a defier)/(P(i is a
for all compliers. Additivity for compliers allows us to complier)- P(i is a defier)),is relatedto the proportionof
define the causal effect of Z on Y for compliers as Hi defiersandis equalto zero underthe monotonicityassump= Yi(I, d) - Yi(O,d) for d = 0, 1 [analogous to the defini- tion. The smallerthe proportionof defiers,the smallerthe
tion for noncompliersgiven in (13)] and the causal effect bias will be from violations of the monotonicityassumpof D on Y as Gi = Yi(z, 1) - Yi(z,0). We can then write tion. However,because the denominatorof this factor is
the IV estimandas
the averagecausaleffect of Z on D, the bias can be large
even if there are few defiers,as long as the averagecausal
E[Yi(I, Di(1)) - Yi(O,Di(0))]
effect of Z on D is small.Note againthat the strongerthe
E[Di(1) - Di(0)]
instrument,the less sensitive the IV estimandis to violations of the monotonicityassumption.The secondfactoris
= E[Gi i is a complier]
the differencein averagecausal effects of D on Y for the
E[Hi]
+
(15) compliersanddefiers.If the averagecausaleffects of D on
Y are identicalfor defiersand compliers,violationsof the
(5
?P[i is a complier]
monotonicity
assumptiongenerateno bias. The less variaThe bias relativeto the averagecausaleffect of D on Y for
tion thereis in the causaleffect of D on Y, the smallerthe
compliers,the secondtermin (15), can also be writtenas
bias from violationsof the monotonicityassumption.
Withoutmonotonicity,the IV estimandcan also be writE[Hi i is a complier]+ E[Hi Ii is a noncomplier]
as
ten
P[i is a noncomplier] (16

P[i is a complier]
The firsttermin the bias in (16) has nothingto do with noncompliance,butis the bias due to the directeffect of assignment for those who take the treatment.If compliancewere
perfect,the secondtermwouldbe zero but the firsttermof
the bias would still be present.The increasedbias in the IV
estimanddue to noncomplianceis directlyproportionalto

(1 + A) E[Yi(1)
.

-

Yi(0)Ii is a complier]
-

A E[Yi(1)

-

Yi(0)Ii is a defier],

the estimand
with A as definedin (18).In thisrepresentation,
is still a weightedaverageof averagetreatmenteffects despite the violationof the monotonicityassumption,but the
weights are alwaysoutsidethe unit intervalbecauseA > 0.

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

452

6.

Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996

AN APPLICATION:THE EFFECT OF MILITARY
SERVICE ON CIVILIANMORTALITY

Hearst,Newman, and Hulley (1986) showed that men
with low lottery numbersin the VietnamEra draftlottery
(i.e., men with Z. = 1) had elevatedmortalityafter their
dischargefrom the military.The authorsattributethis elevated mortalityto the detrimentaleffect of serving in the
militaryduringwartimeon well-being. Similarly,Angrist
(1990) attributeddifferencesin subsequentearningsby lottery numberto the effect of servingin the militaryon earnings. These conclusionsare primarilybasedon the fact that
between1970 and 1973,priorityfor the draftwas randomly
assignedin a lotteryusing datesof birth.Eachdate of birth
in the cohortsat risk of being draftedwas assigneda random sequence number (RSN) from 1-365. The Selective

Service called men for inductionby RSN up to a ceiling
determinedby the defense department.Men born in 1950
were potentiallydraftedup to RSN 195 in 1970, men born
in 1951 were potentiallydraftedup to RSN 125 in 1971,
and men born in 1952 were potentiallydraftedup to RSN
95 in 1972. We refer the readerto Hearstet al. (1986) and
Angrist(1990)for furtherdetailson thesedataandthe draft.
In their paper,Hearstet al. focused on the differencein
mortalityrisk by draft status.For example,they compare
the numberof deathsof men bornin 1950 with RSN below
195 to the numberof deaths of men born in 1950 with
RSN above 195. Ourpurposein returningto this example
is twofold. First, we discuss the validity of Assumptions
1-5 in this context.Second,we show how the sensitivityof
the estimatedaveragetreatmenteffect to violationsof the
exclusionrestrictionand the monotonicityassumptioncan
be exploredusing the resultsfrom the previoussection.
6.1 Assessment of Assumptions 1-5

* Monotonicityassumption,Assumption5: Thereis no
one who would have served if given a high lottery
number,but not if given a low lotterynumber.
Althoughwe believe these assumptionsare plausible,a
case can be made for violations of most. For example,it
has been arguedthat the fractionof a cohort that served
in the military affects the civilian labor marketresponse
to veterans(De Tray 1982). If this assertionis true, then
the SUTVAassumptionvery likely does not hold. Another
reasonfor possibleviolationsof SUTVAis thatpeople not
draftedmay be inducedto serve in the militaryby friends
who were drafted.
Thereis also some evidencethatsome men with low lotterynumberschangedtheireducationalplansso as to retain
draft defermentsand avoid the conscription(Angristand
Krueger1992b).If so, then the exclusionrestrictioncould
be violated,becausedraftstatusmay have affectedcivilian
outcomes throughchannelsother than veteranstatus. We
returnto this issue in some detail shortly.
Monotonicitywould be violated if, for example,someone, who would have volunteeredfor the Navy when not
at risk of being draftedbecause of a high lottery number,wouldhave chosen to avoidmilitaryservice altogether
when at risk of being draftedbecauseof a low lotterynumber.It seemsunlikelythatthereweremanyin the population
in this category.
It is clear that the Assumption4 is satisfiedbecausethe
likelihoodof servingin the militarysharplyincreaseswith
draftstatus.
Another uncontroversialassumptionis the ignorability
of treatmentassignment,which allows simpleunbiasedestimationof the averagecausal effects of Z on D and of
Z on Y. Althoughthereis some evidencethat the firstlottery, which was executedusing a poorly designedphysical
randomization,was not actually random(Fienberg1971)
it neverthelessis almost certainlyignorable.Ignoringthis
complicationand postponingconsiderationof the possible
problemswith the exclusionrestrictionandthe monotonicity condition,we forge aheadwith the IV approach.

The potentialoutcomein this example,Yi(z, d), is an indicatorvariableequal to one if person i would have died
between 1974 and 1983 given lotteryassignmentz andmilitaryserviceindicatord. To distinguishthis from mortality
duringthe war period,we refer to Yi as civilian mortality.
For simplicity,we ignore the effect that mortalityduring
the war mighthave on the size of the populationat risk.
6.2 The Instrumental Variables Estimates
For a valid causalinterpretationof the IV estimand,we
Table2 presentsdata and some estimatesof the effects
require:
of militaryserviceon civilianmortalityfor white men born
in 1950 and 1951 by year of birthanddraftstatus.Column
* SUTVA,Assumption1:The veteranstatusof anyman 3 shows the numberof deaths in both Pennsylvaniaand
at risk of being draftedin the lotterywas not affected Californiabetween 1974-1983. Columns5 and 6 show the
by the draft statusof othersat risk of being drafted, averagenumberof civiliandeathsandsuicidesrespectively
and, similarly,that the civilian mortalityof any such per 1,000,computedas the numberof deathsdividedby the
populationat risk estimatedusingthe 1970 census.Column
man was not affectedby the draftstatusof others;
* IgnorableAssignment,Assumption2: Assignmentof 7 showsthe frequencyof veteranstatus,estimatedfromthe
1984 Surveyof Incomeand ProgramParticipation(SIPP).
draftstatuswas random;
In columns 5-7, the entries in the thirdpair of rows give
* Exclusionrestriction,Assumption3: Civilianmortal- the differencein probabilityof death,suicide, and veteran
ity risk was not affectedby draftstatusonce veteran status between those with low and high lottery numbers
statusis takeninto account;
(drafteligible or not). The fourthpairof rows in columns5
* NonzeroAverageCausalEffect of Z on D, Assump- and 6 give the ratioof these differencesto the differencein
tion 4: Havinga low lotterynumberincreasesthe av- the probabilityof being veteranby drafteligibility.These
erage probabilityof service;
are the standardIV estimates.An alternativeapproachto

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin: Causal Effects and Instrumental Variables

453

Table 2. Data on Civilian Mortalityfor White Men Born in 1950 and 1951

Year

Draft
eligibilitya

Number
of deathsb

Number
of suicidesc

Probability
of deathd

Probability
of suicide

Probability
of militaryservicee

1950

Yes

2,601

436

No

2,169

352

.0204
(.0004)
.0195
(.0004)
.0009
(.0006)
.0056
(.0040)

.0034
(.0002)
.0032
(.0002)
.0002
(.0002)
.0013
(.0013)

.3527
(.0325)
.1934
(.0233)
.1593
(.0401)

Yes

1,494

279

No

2,823

480

.0170
(.0004)
.0168
(.0003)
.0002
(.0005)
.0015
(.0037)

.0032
(.0002)
.0029
(.0001)
.0003
(.0002)
.0022
(.0016)

.2831
(.0390)
.1468
(.0180)
.1362
(.0429)

Difference (Yes minus No)
IV estimatesf
1951

Difference (Yes minus No)
IV estimates
a

Determined by lottery number cutoff: RSN 195 for men born in 1950, and RSN 125 for men born in 1951.
b From California and Pennsylvania administrative records, all deaths 1974-1983. Data sources and methods documented by Hearst et al. (1986). Note: Sample sizes differ from Hearst et al.,
because non-U.S.-born are included to match SIPP data in the last column.
c The mortality figures are tabulated from the data set analyzed by Hearst et al. (1986).
d The estimated population at risk is from the author's tabulation of 1970 census data. Estimates by draft-eligibilitystatus are computed assuming a uniform distribution of lottery numbers.
Standard errors are given in parentheses.
e These figures are taken from Angrist (1990), table 2, and were tabulated using a special version of the SIPP that has been matched to indicators of draft eligibility. Note that probabilities
estimated using the SIPP are for the entire country and do not take account of morality.The impact of mortality on differences in the probability of being a veteran by eligibility status is small
enough to have only trivialconsequences for the estimation.
f The standard errors, following econometric practice (e.g. Imbens and Angrist 1994), were calculated based on a normal approximation to the sampling distributionof the ratio of the difference in
estimated probability of death/suicide and the difference in estimated probabilityof serving. We assume independence of numerator and denominator because they were calculated from different
data sets. Pooled estimates show a statistically significant increase in risk at conventional significance levels (e.g., Hearst, Newman, Hulley 1986).

estimatingthe local averagetreatmenteffect, which takes
into account the full implicationsof the assumptions,is
providedin Imbensand Rubin(1994b).
As a specific example, considermen born in 1950. Of
the men with low lotterynumbers(Zi = 1), 35.3%actually
servedin the military.Of those who had high lotterynumbers (Zi = 0), only 19.3%servedin the military.Random
assignmentof draft status suggests that draft statushad a
causaleffect thatincreasedthe probabilityof servingby an
estimated15.9%on average.Similarly,of those with low
lotterynumbers,2.04%died between 1974 and 1983, comparedto 1.95%of those who hadhigh lotterynumbers.The
differenceof .09%can be interpretedas an estimateof the
averagecausal effect of draft status on civilian mortality.
Assuming that these estimatedcausal effects are population averages,the ratio of these two causaleffects of draft
status is, underthe Assumptions1-5, the causal effect of
military service on civilian mortalityfor the 15.9% who
were inducedby the draftto serve in the military.For this
group,the averagecausaleffect is .56%,which amountsto
approximatelya 25% increasein the probabilityof death
(givenaveragemortalityratesaround7%).These estimates
highlight the fact that the IV estimatordoes not require
observationson individuals;sample averagesof outcomes
and treatmentindicatorsby values of the instrumentsare
sufficient.In applicationslike the one discussedhere, these
momentsare drawnfromdifferentdatasets. (Fora detailed
discussionof IV estimationwith momentsfrom two data
sets, see Angristand Krueger1992a.)

6.3 Sensitivity to the Exclusion Restriction

Supposethatthe exclusionrestrictionis violatedbecause
men with low lottery numberswere more likely to stay
in school. A schooling-lotteryconnectioncould arise because, for much of the Vietnamperiod,college and graduate studentswere exempt from the draft. Althoughnew
graduatestudentdefermentswere eliminatedin 1967 and
new undergraduate
defermentswere eliminatedin December 1971, many of the men with low lottery numbersin
1970 and 1971 could have postponedconscriptionby staying in school. Workingwith special versionsof the March
1979 and March 1981-1985 CurrentPopulationSurveys
(CPS's),AngristandKrueger(1992b)showedthatmenborn
in 1951 with lottery numbers 1-75 had completed .358
more years of schooling than men with lottery numbers
above 150, who were not drafted.
How muchbias in estimatesof the effect of militaryservice on mortalityis this correlationbetween lottery numbers andschoolinglikely to generate?Addressingthis question requiresdataon the connectionbetweenschoolingand
mortality.The relationshipbetween socioeconomic variables and mortalityis uncertainand the subject of considerableresearchin epidemiologyand social science. (An
early studyin this areais KitagawaandHauser1973.) For
the purposesof illustration,we have taken estimatesfrom
Duleep's(1986) studyof socioeconomicvariablesandmortality using men surveyed in the March 1973 CPS and
linked to 1973-1978 Social Securitydata. Estimatespresented in Table 1 of Duleep (1986) suggest that married
white men 25 years old with 1-3 years of college have

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

454

Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996

mortalityrates roughly .0017 per thousandhigherthan do
men with only high school degrees.
Assumethatthe excess mortalityamongmen with some
college accumulateslinearly,so that an additionalyear of
schoolingraises mortalityby .0017 x (1/3) = .00056.Men
with low lotterynumbersmay have as much as .358 more
years of schooling than men with high lottery numbers.
Thus an estimate of the mortalitydifferenceattributable
to the effect of draft status on schooling is .358 x .00056
= .00019, essentiallyas large as the .0002 observeddifference in mortalityby draft statusfor white men born in
1951. Assuming additivecausal effects of educationand
militaryservice on mortality,the bias formula(15) applied
to this exampleis E[H1/(E[Di(l) - Di(O)]),which is estimated by .00019/.1362 = .0014 because there is a .1362

differencein the probabilitybeing a veteranby drafteligibility status.Thustakingaccountof this potentialbias could
eliminatethe estimated.0015 impact of veteranstatus on
civilian mortality!
This calculationillustratesthe cautionsthat should accompany the IV estimates. But the extent to which the
causal interpretationof the estimatesin Table2 shouldbe
discountedin light of these findingsis unclear.First,there
is no evidenceof a schooling-lotterynumberconnectionfor
the 1950 cohort,yet lottery-basedestimatesof the effects
of serviceareeven largerfor men bornin 1950 thanfor the
1951 cohortused in the illustration.Second,the schoolingmortalityconnectionis not well determined[the Duleep
(1986) estimateused here is not actuallysignificantlydifferent from zero], and this relationshipis also subject to
sign reversals.For example,althoughmen with some college havehighermortalitythanhigh school-onlygraduates,
the Duleep studyshowedalmostno differencebetweenthe
mortalityof high school only graduatesand college graduates.Thus, a calculationbased solely on graduateswould
indicateno bias.
6.4 Sensitivity to the Monotonicity Assumption

Withoutmonotonicity,the averagecausaleffect of Z on
D estimatesthe differencebetweenthe proportionsof compliers and defiers.Table 2 thereforesuggests that 15.93%
more people are compliersthan defiers. Supposethat 5%
of the populationare defiers.This would imply that about
21% of the populationare compliers,and that the multiplier P[i is a defier]/(P[i is a complier]- P[i is a defier])
could be as large as .33 ratherthan zero, as requiredby
monotonicity.Next, supposethat we assumethe difference
between averagetreatmenteffects for compliers and defiers is at most .0041. This numberwas chosen because
the range of IV estimatesin Table 2 (.0056 for 1950 and
.0015 for 1951) is equal to this amount.This implies that
the estimatedaveragetreatmenteffect for complierscould
be as small as .0056 - .33 x .0041 = .0042 or as large as
.0056+ .33 x .0041 .0070. To reversethe sign of the average causal effect throughviolationsof the monotonicity
assumptionwould thereforerequirethe presenceof an implausiblylarge group of defiers,or very large differences
between averageeffects for compliersand defiers.

7.

CONCLUSION

In this articlewe have outlineda frameworkfor causal
inferencein settings where randomassignmenthas taken
place, but complianceis not perfect;that is, the treatment
receivedis nonignorable.In an attemptto estimatethe effect of receiptof treatment,ratherthanassignmentof treatment as in intention-to-treatanalysis,we make use of instrumentalvariables.This approachhas long been used by
economistsin the context of regressionmodels with constanttreatmenteffects.We show thatthis techniquecan be
fit into the Rubin Causal Model and used for causal inference without assumingconstanttreatmenteffects. The
advantagesof embeddingthis approachin the RCM are
twofold. First, it makes the natureof the identifyingassumptionsmore transparent.Second, it allows us to consider the sensitivity of results to deviations from these
assumptionsin a straightforwardmanner.We hope that
the approachoutlined in this article serves to make the
IV approachmore accessibleto statisticians,while helping
economistsunderstandandinterpretthe strongassumptions
requiredfor a causalinterpretationof IV estimates.
[Received June 1993. Revised December 1995.]

REFERENCES
Angrist,J. D. (1990),"LifetimeEarningsandthe VietnamEraDraftLottery:EvidenceFromSocialSecurityAdministrative
Records,"
American
Economic Review, 80, 313-335.

Angrist,J. D., and Imbens,G. W. (1991), "Sourcesof IdentifyingInformationin EvaluationModels,"TechnicalWorkingPaper117, National
Bureauof EconomicResearch.
(1995), "Two-StageLeast SquaresEstimationof AverageCausal
Effects in Models With VariableTreatmentIntensity,"Journalof the
American Statistical Association, 90, 431-442.

Angrist,J. D., Imbens,G. W., andRubin,D. B. (1993), "Identification
of
CausalEffectsUsing Instrumental
Variables,"
TechnicalWorkingPaper
136, NationalBureauof EconomicResearch.
Angrist,J., Graddy,K., and Imbens,G. W. (1995), "Nonparametric
DemandAnalysis With an Applicationto the Demandfor Fresh Fish,"
TechnicalWorkingPaper178 NBERApril'95, MassachusettsInstitute
of Technology.
Angrist,J. D., and Krueger,A. (1991), "Does CompulsorySchool AttendanceAffect Schoolingand Earnings?,"QuarterlyJournalof Economics,106, 979-1014.
(1992a),"TheEffectof Age at SchoolEntryon Educational
Attainment:An Applicationof InstrumentalVariablesWith MomentsFrom
Two Samples,"Journal of the American Statistical Association, 87, 328-

336.
(1992b),"Estimatingthe Payoffto SchoolingUsing the VietnamEraDraftLottery,"WorkingPaper4067, NationalBureauof Economic
Research.
Balke,A., andPearl,J. (1993),"Nonparametric
Boundson CausalEffects
FromPartialComplianceData,"TechnicalReportR-199,Universityof
California,Los Angeles,ComputerScienceDept.
D. A. (1984),Instrumental
Bowden,R. J., andTurkington,
Variables,Cambridge,U.K.:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Card,D. (1993),"UsingGeographicVariationin CollegeProximityto Estimatethe Returnsto Schooling,"WorkingPaper4483, NationalBureau
of EconomicResearch.
New York:JohnWiley.
Cox, D. R. (1958),Planningof Experiments,
De Tray,D. (1982), "VeteranStatusas a ScreeningDevice,"American
Economic Review, 72, 133-142.

theEffectof Incomeon AdultMortality
Duleep,H. 0. (1986),"Measuring
Using LongitudinalAdministrativeRecordData,"Journalof Human
Resources, 21, 238-251.
Durbin, J. (1954), "Errors in Variables,"Review of the International Statistical Institute, 22, 23-32.

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin: Causal Effects and Instrumental Variables

455

Econometrics,Cambridge,U.K.:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Manski,C. F. (1994),"TheSelectionProblem,"in Advancesin Economet86, 9-26.
rics, ed. C. Sims,New York:CambridgeUniversityPress,pp. 143-170.
Fienberg,S. (1971), "Randomization
and Social Affairs:The 1970 Draft McClellan,M., and Newhouse,J. (1994), "MarginalBenefits of MediLottery,"Science,171, 255-261.
cal TreatmentIntensity:Acute MyocardialInfarctionin the Elderly,"
Fisher,R. A. (1918),"TheCausesof HumanVariability,"
EugenicsReview,
mimeo,NationalBureauof EconomicResearch.
10, 213-220.
AustralianJournalof
Moran,P. (1961),"PathCoefficientsReconsidered,"

Efron,B., andFeldman,D. (1991), "Complianceas an ExplanatoryVariable in Clinical Trials,"Journal of the American Statistical Association,

(1925), Statistical Methods for Research Workers,London: Oliver

& Boyd.
Goldberger,
A. S. (1972),"Structural
EquationMethodsin the Social Sci-

Statistics, 3, 87-93.
Morgan, M. (1990), The History of Econometric Ideas, Cambridge, U.K.:

CambridgeUniversityPress.
Neyman,J. (1923),"Onthe Applicationof ProbabilityTheoryto AgriculGreenland,S., andRobins,J. M. (1986), "Identifiability,
Exchangeability, turalExperiments:
Essay on Principles,Section9,"translatedin Statisences," Econometrica, 40, 979-1001.

and Epidemiological Confounding," International Journal of Epidemi-

tical Science, 5, 465-480, 1990.

ology, 15, 413-419.
Estimationin
Permutt,T., and Hebel, J. (1989), "Simultaneous-Equation
Haavelmo,T. (1943), "TheStatisticalImplicationsof a Systemof Simula ClinicalTrialof the Effectof Smokingon BirthWeight,"Biometrics,
taneousEquations,"
Econometrica,11, 1-12.
45, 619-622.
(1944), "TheProbabilityApproachin Econometrics,"
Economet- Robins,J. M. (1989),"TheAnalysisof RandomizedandNon-Randomized
rica, 12 (Supplement),1-115.
AIDS TreatmentTrialsUsing a New Approachto CausalInferencein
Hearst,N., Newman,T., and Hulley,S. (1986), "DelayedEffects of the
Longitudinal Studies," in Health SertviceResearch Methodology:A Focus
MilitaryDrafton Mortality:A RandomizedNaturalExperiment,"
New
on AIDS,eds. by L. Sechrest,H. Freeman,andA. Bailey,Washington,
England Journal of Medicine, 314, 620-624.
DC: U.S. PublicHealthService.
Heckman,J. (1990), "Varietiesof Selection Bias,"AmericanEconomic Robins,J. M., andTsiatis,A. A. (1991),"Correcting
for Non-Compliance
Review,80, 313-318.
in RandomizedTrialsUsing Rank-Preserving
StructuralFailureTime
Heckman,J., and Robb,R. (1985), "AlternativeMethodsfor Evaluating
Models," Communications in Statistics, Part A-Theory and Methods,
the Impact of Interventions," in Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market
20, 2069-2631.
Data,eds.HeckmanandSinger,New York:CambridgeUniversityPress, Rosenbaum,P., andRubin,D. B. (1983), "AssessingSensitivityto an Unpp. 156-245.
observedBinaryCovariatein an Observational
StudyWithBinaryOutHolland,P. (1986),"StatisticsandCausalInference,"Journalof theAmerJournal the Royal Statistical Society, Ser. B, 45, 212-218.
ican Statistical Association, 81, 945-970.

(1988),"CausalInference,PathAnalysis,andRecursiveStructural
EquationsModels,"(with discussion)in SociologicalMethodology,ed.
Washington,DC: AmericanSociologicalAssociation,pp. 449-493.
and Estimationof
Imbens,G. W., and Angrist,J. (1994), "Identification
LocalAverageTreatmentEffects,"Econometrica,62, 467-476.
Imbens,G. W., andRubin,D. B. (1994a),"BayesianInferencefor Causal
Effects in RandomizedExperimentsWith Noncompliance,"Harvard
University,Dept. of Economics.
(1994b),"Onthe Fragilityof Instrumental
VariablesEstimators,"
WorkingPaper1356,HarvardInstituteof EconomicResearch.
Kempthorne, 0. (1952), The Design and Analysis of Experiments, New

York:JohnWiley.
Kitagawa, E. M., and Hauser, P. M. (1973), Differential Mortality in the
United States:A Study in Socioeconomic Epidemiology, Cambridge, MA:

come,"

of

CausalEffectsof Treatmentsin RandomRubin,D. B. (1974),"Estimating
ized and Nonrandomized Studies," Journal of Educational Psychology,

66, 688-701.
(1978), "BayesianInferencefor CausalEffects,"The Annals of
Statistics, 6, 34-58.

Analysis of Experimental
(1980), Commenton "Randomization
Data:TheFisherRandomization
Test,"by D. Basu,Journalof theAmerican Statistical Association, 75, 591-593.

(1990), Comment:"Neyman(1923) and CausalInferencein ExStudies,"StatisticalScience,5, 472-480.
perimentsandObservational
(1991), "PracticalImplicationsof Modes of StatisticalInference
for CausalEffectsandthe CriticalRole of theAssignmentMechanism,"
Biometrics, 47, 1213-1234.
Schultz, H. (1928), Statistical Laws of Supply and Demand, Chicago: Uni-

versityof ChicagoPress.
HarvardUniversityPress.
Lalonde,R. (1986), "Evaluatingthe EconometricEvaluationsof Training Sommer,A., andZeger,S. (1991), 'On EstimatingEfficacyfrom Clinical
Programs,"American Economic Review, 76, 604-620.

Trials," Statistics in Medicine, 10, 45-52.

Lee, Y., Ellenberg,J., Hirtz,D., andNelson,K. (1991),"Analysisof Clin- Wright, S. (1928), Appendix to The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils,
ical Trialsby TreatmentActuallyReceived:Is It Really an Option?," by P. G. Wright,New York:MacMillan.
Annalsof Mathematical
(1934),"TheMethodof PathCoefficients,"
Statistics in Medicine, 10, 1595-1605.
Statistics, 5, 161-215.
Little,R. (1985),"ANote AboutModelsfor SelectivityBias,"EconometZelen, M. (1979), "A New Design for RandomizedClinicalTrials,"New
rica, 53, 1469-1474.
Maddala, G. S. (1983), Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in

England Journal of Medicine, 300, 1242-1245.

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.209 on Tue, 20 Nov 2012 12:24:04 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

