This article was downloaded by: [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg]
On: 19 November 2012, At: 05:32
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of the American Statistical Association
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uasa20

Bounds on Treatment Effects from Studies with
Imperfect Compliance
a

Alexander Balke & Judea Pearl
a

a

Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90024, USA

To cite this article: Alexander Balke & Judea Pearl (1997): Bounds on Treatment Effects from Studies with Imperfect
Compliance, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92:439, 1171-1176
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1997.10474074

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to
anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should
be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims,
proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in
connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Bounds on Treatment Effects From Studies With
Imperfect Compliance
Alexander BALKE and Judea PEARL

!his ~icle establishes. nonpara~etric formulas that can be used to bound the average treatment effect in experimental studies
I~ WhICh tr.eat~en.t assIgnm.ent IS random but subject compliance is imperfect. The bounds provided are the tightest possible,
gIVen.the distribution o~ assignments, treatments, and responses. The formulas show that even with high rates of noncompliance,
expenmental data can yield useful and sometimes accurate information on the average effect of a treatment on the population.
KEY WORDS: Causal models; Latent variables; Linear programming; Noncompliance.

Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg] at 05:32 19 November 2012

1.

INTRODUCTION

Consider an experimental study in which random assignment has occurred but compliance is not perfect (i.e., the
treatment received differs from that assigned). It is well
known that under such conditions, a bias may be introduced.
Subjects who did not comply with the assignment may be
precisely those who would have responded adversely (positively) to the treatment; therefore, the actual effect of the
treatment, when applied uniformly to the population, might
be substantially less (more) effective than the study reveals.
In an attempt to avert this bias, analysts sometimes resort
to parametric models that make restrictive commitments to
a particular mode of interaction between compliance and
response (Efron and Feldman 1991). Angrist, Imbens, and
Rubin (1996) have identified a set of assumptions under
which a nonparametric correction formula, called "instrumental variables," is valid for certain subpopulations. Because these subpopulations cannot be identified from empirical observation alone, the need remains to devise alternative, assumption-free formulas for assessing the effect of
treatment over the population as a whole. Manski (1990)
and Robins (1989) have derived such bounds, but did not
make full use of the information available in the data. In this
article we provide sharp (i.e., the tightest possible) bounds
on the average treatment effect.

2.

PROBLEM FORMULATION

The canonical partial-compliance setting can be graphically modeled as shown in Figure 1. We assume that Z, D,
and Y are observed dichotomous variables, where Z represents the (randomized) treatment assignment, D is the treatment actually received, and Y is the observed response. U
represents specific characteristics of an individual subjectnamely, all factors, both observed and unobserved, that influence the way in which a subject's outcome Y may depend
Alexander Balke is a research associate and Judea Pearl is Professor,
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90024. This research was partially supported by Air Force grant AFOSR
900136, National Science Foundation grant IRI-9200918, and NorthropRockwell Micro grant 93-124. Alexander Balke was supported by the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation. This work benefited from discussions with
Joshua Angrist, David Chickering, Thomas Ferguson, David Galles, Guido
Imbens, James Robins, and Donald Rubin. The authors thank Bradley
Efron for providing the data used in Section 4.2.

on the treatment D. The experimental study is modeled as a
two-step process: (1) treatment selection and (2) treatment
administration. In the first step, each subject is allowed to
select a treatment in accordance with the following factors:
the assignment (Z), basic physiological characteristics (U),
and, possibly, initial reactions to the treatment or placebo.
(Such reactions are not shown explicitly in the graph, because they merely modify the influence of Z and U on D,
and the diagram makes no assumption as to the nature of
this influence.) Once the treatment D is selected, the treatment administration step begins, during which subjects are
assumed to remain within their selected treatment arms until the outcome Y is recorded; back and forth switching
between placebo and active groups is not allowed at this
stage.
Given this two-stage process, the second assumption is
that the assignment (Z) per se does not alter any physiological characteristics (U) that determine how an individual would react to any given treatment. This assumption,
which Angrist et al. (1996) termed "exclusion restriction"
and Manski (1990) called "set-level restriction," is represented in the causal diagram of Figure 1 by the absence of
a direct link from Z to Y or from Z to U; all paths between
Z and Y go through D. (A fuller account of the statistical
and causal implications of structural diagrams, and their relation to Rubin's model of counterfactuals [Holland 1988],
was given in Pearl 1995a.)
To facilitate the notation, we let z, d, and Y represent the
values taken by the variables Z, D, and Y, with the following interpretation: Z E {zo, Zl}, Zl asserts that treatment
has been assigned (zo, its negation); d. E {do, d1 } ; d: asserts
that treatment has been administered (do, its negation); and
y E {Yo, Yl}, Yl asserts a positive observed response (Yo,
its negation). Multivalued or continuous outcomes can be
easily accommodated in the model using the event Y ::; Y
as a (dichotomous) outcome variable. Extension to continuous treatments is discussed in Section 3. The domain of U
remains unspecified and may in general combine the spaces
of several random variables, both discrete and continuous.
The model analyzed invokes two assumptions of independence:

1171

© 1997 American Statistical Association
Journal of the American Statistical Association
September 1997, Vol. 92, No. 439, Theory and Methods

Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1997

1172

Treatment
assigned

Z

Latent
factors

Y

Observed
response

Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg] at 05:32 19 November 2012

Figure 1. Graphical Representation of Causal Dependencies in a
Randomized Clinical Trial With Partial Compliance.

1. For a given individual, the treatment assignment does
not influence Y directly, but only through the actual treatment D; that is, ZllYI{D, U}.
2. Z and U are marginally independent; that is, zsui.
This independence is ensured partly through the randomization of Z, which rules out a common cause for both Z
and U, and partly through our assumption that physiological factors (U) are not influenced by the assignment (Z).
These two independencies impose on the joint distribution the decomposition

P(y, d, z, u) = P(yld, u)P(dlz, u)P(z)P(u),
which of course cannot be observed directly, because U is
unmeasurable. (We take the liberty of denoting the prior
distribution of U by P(u), even though U may consist of
continuous variables.) However, the marginal distribution
P(y, d, z), and in particular the conditional distributions

P(y, dlz) = L

P(yld, u)P(dlz, u)P(u)

Our task is then to estimate or bound the expressions in
(2) and (3), given the observed probabilities P(y, dlz o) and
P(y, dlz l), as expressed in (1). This may be accomplished
by a procedure that we detailed in earlier work (Balke and
Pearl 1994), which is based on linear programming optimization coupled with the fact that the domain of U can be
partitioned into 16 equivalence classes, each representing
one of four possible mappings from Z to D conjoined with
one of four possible mappings from D to Y.
3.

RESULTS

Let the conditional distribution P(y, dlz) over the observed variables be denoted as follows:

Poo.o
POl.O
PlO.O
Pn.o

= P(yo, dolzo) POO.I = P(yo, dolzd
= P(yO' dllzo) POLl = P(yO'dllzl)
= P(YI' dolzo) PIO.I = P(YI' dolzd
= P(YI,dllzo) Pn.l = P(YI,dllzl)

Optimization of (2) subject to the equality constraints
given in (1) defines a linear programming problem that
yields a closed-form solution by enumerating all vertices
of the constraint polygon of the dual problem. This procedure leads to the following bounds:

max

PIO.I
}
PIO.O
:-: : P(Ylldo)
{ PlO.O + Pn.o - ,POO.1 - Pn.l
POl.O + PlO.O - POO.I - POLl

(1)

u

'

z E {zo, zd, are observed, and these observations constrain
the factor P(yld, u)P(u) to produce bounds on treatment
effects.
Treatment effects are characterized by a distribution
P(yld) that represents the probability that Y would have
been equal to Y, if D were equal to d under a randomized
experiment. In general, a value annotated with a checkC)
will indicate that the corresponding variable has been set to
that value by a randomized control. (Angrist et al. [1996]
and Holland [1988] denoted this distribution by P(YD=d),
but we find the "check" notation more flexible, as it permits
one to specify explicitly what is controlled and what is allowed to vary in any given study [Pearl 1995a].) Thus to
assess the distribution of Y if the treatment D were applied
uniformly to the population, we should calculate
P(Yld) ~ L

P(yld, u)P(u),

(2)

1-POO.I

< min
-

}

1 - Poo.O

{ POl.O
PlO.O

+ PIO.O + PIO.I + PU.1
+ Pu.O +POLl + PlO.I

,

and

PU.O
PU.I
-Poo.O - POl.O + POO.I
-POl.O - PlO.O + PlO.I

< min {
-

+ PILl
+ PU.I

Poo.O
PlO.O

~ =~~~:~

+ Pu.O + PIO.I + Pn.l
+ Pu.O + POO.I + PU.I

}.

In addition, if we optimize the difference of the two terms
in (3) by the same linear programming technique, then we
where the factors P(yld, u) and P(u) are the same as those find that the expressions for the upper and lower bounds
in (1). Similarly, if we are interested in the average change on the average causal effect ACE( D ----> Y) are equal to the
in Y due to treatment, then we should compute the average difference of the corresponding bounds on the individual
causal effect, ACE(D ----> Y) (Holland 1988), given by
terms; that is, the lower bound on ACE(D ----> Y) is equal to
P(Ylldl)'s lower bound less P(Ylldo)'s upper bound, and
ACE(D ----> Y) ~ P(Ylldd - P(Ylldo)
the upper bound on ACE(D ----> Y) is equal to P(Ylldd's
= LP(U)[P(Ylldl,u)-P(Ylldo,u)]. (3) upper bound less P(Ylldo)'s lower bound. The resulting formulas are
u
u

1173

Balke and Pearl: Bounds on Treatment Effects

ACE(D

-+

Y)

~max

POO.O + Pn.l - 1
POO.I + Pn.l - 1
Pn.o + POO.I - 1
POO.O + Pn.o - 1
2poo.o + Pn.o + PlO.I + Pn.l
POO.O + 2pn.o + POO.I + POLl
PlO.O + Pn.o + 2pOO.I + PILl
POO.O + P01.0 + POO.I + 2pn.1

-

(4)

2
2
2
2

Under this assumption, which Angrist et al. (1996) called
monotonicity, the inequalities in (6) can be tightened (Balke
and Pearl 1993) to give

and

Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg] at 05:32 19 November 2012

ACE(D

-+

which was called the instrumental inequality in earlier work
(Pearl 1994).
The instrumental inequality can be further tightened if
additional assumptions are made about subjects' behaviors;
for example, that no individual would consistently act contrarian to his or her assignment, or, mathematically, that for
all u we have

Y)
1 - PlO.O - POLl
1 - P01.0 - PlO.I
1 - P01.0 - PlO.O
1 - POLl - PlO.I
2po1.o - PlO.O - PIO.I - PILl
P01.0 - 2plO.O - POO.I - POLl
PlO.O - Pn.o - 2POLl - P10.I
POO.O - P01.0 - POLl - 2plO.I

and
(7)

for all Y E {Yo, YI}. The monotonicity assumption can
sometimes be verified (or enforced) empirically; for exam2pl~, by making su~e that no subject in the placebo group
2gains access to active treatment. In such cases, (7) provides
2more stringent tests for the model assumptions. However,
in cases where monotonicity cannot be ensured, violation
These bounds represent substantial improvement over
of the inequalities in (7) may mean that randomization (of
those derived by Robins (1989) and Manski (1990), which
Z) was imperfect, that Z has a direct effect on Y, or that
correspond to the four upper terms in both (4) and (5). One
contrarian subjects were present.
can show that the width of the bounds in (4) and (5) canIt can also be shown (Balke and Pearl 1993) that when
not exceed the rate of noncompliance, P(dllzo) + P(dolzd,
monotonicity holds, the bounds in (4) and (5) reduce to
and may in some cases collapse to a point estimate, even
those derived by Manski (1996) and Robins (1989) (the first
when as many as 50% of subjects switch over to unasfo.urentries in (4) and (5)), and the width coincides precisely
signed treatments (Pearl 1995b). Precise determination of
WI~ the rate of noncompliance, P(dllzo) + P(dolz l).
trea~ment effects is feasible whenever (a) the percentage of
Finally, the method of causal analysis we outline here persubjects complying with assignment Zo is the same as those
~~s. one to evaluate a wide variety of counterfactual probacomplying with Zl and (b) in at least one treatment arm d
Y, and z are perfectly correlated.
' bilities; for example, the probability that a given individual
would have recovered had he or she not been assigned treatThis and other results regarding bounds on treatment efment (zo), when in actuality he or she has been assigned the
fects in partial compliance studies are elaborated in earlier
treatment (zd, taken the treatment (dd, and not recovered
work (Balke 1995; Balke and Pearl 1993). In particular, it
~Yo). This intricate probability can be bounded by analyzis shown that the basic structural assumptions underlying
mg the causal effect of the assignment in the subpopulation
randomiz.ed-assignment experiments, although not directly
testable, Imply testable restrictions on the observed distri- characterized by {Zl' d l, Yo}. We detailed a general method
for obtaining such bounds in earlier work (Balke and Pearl
butions. By requiring that no upper bound be less than the
1994).
corresponding lower bound, we obtain
It is possible to extend this analysis to studies in which
treatment may take on more than two values by simply
P(Yo,dolzo)+P(YI,dolz l) < 1,
reformulating the linear programming problem over a mulP(Yo,d1Izo)+P(YI,dllzd < 1,
tivalued variable D. However, this method becomes comP(YI' dalzo) + P(yO' dolzd < 1,
putationally expensive, because the number of equivalence
and
classes in the U domain increases exponentially with the
P(YI,dllzo)+P(Yo,dllz l) < 1.
(6) cardinality of D. Alternatively, using the same linear programming techniques as in the case of dichotomous treatIf any of these inequalities is violated, then the investigator
ment, one can derive bounds on the difference in causal effican deduce that either the assignments were not properly
cacy of any two treatment levels, say do and di, while allowrandomized or the assignment exerted some direct influence
ing subjects receiving treatment levels other than do and d l
on subjects' responses. These inequalities, when general(denoted by dm ) to exhibit arbitrary behavior. Remarkably,
ized to multivalued variables, assume the simple form
the bounds derived in this way, letting d E {do, d1, dm },
~e expressed identically to (4) and (5), though no assumpm:X:~=m;xp(y,dlz):s; 1,
nons whatsoever have been made about the composition of
y
~

min

2-

.

(5)

Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1997

1174

dm or the relation of any values in dm to Y (Balke 1995).

Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg] at 05:32 19 November 2012

These bounds represent the worst case (least informative)
behavior of subjects in the dm category and are implicitly
affected by the size of the dm category through the equality
P(dolz) + P(d1Iz) + P(dmlz) = 1.
When the treatment is continuous, few if any subjects
would take on any given level of treatment precisely. However, it is reasonable to assume that there exists a treatment interval around each d within which the subject's outcome is, for all practical purposes, homogeneous. In other
words, for every u we have P(Yld',u) rv P(Yld",u) for all
d', d" E [d - 8, d + 8). Under this assumption, which obviously becomes more reasonable as 8 decreases, it is possible
to apply our previous analysis and derive bounds on the average change in treatment effect between any two treatment
levels. This is illustrated in the next section.

Table 2. Conditional Probability Distribution P(Y,dlz) Derived
From the Data in Table 1.

Zo
P(Y,dlz)

Yo

Yl

Yo

Yl

.0064

.9936

.0028

.1972
.7990

o

o

o

Accordingly, we conclude that the average treatment effect
lies in the range
-.1946

s ACE(D ~ Y) < .0054,

which is rather revealing: Vitamin A supplement, if uniformly administered, is seen as capable of increasing mortality rate by much as 19.46% and is incapable of reducing
mortality rate by more than .54%. The intent-to-treat analy4. EXAMPLES
sis might mislead one to believe that vitamin A supplement
has a beneficial effect of P(Yllzl) - P(Yllzo) = .0026, in
4.1 Vitamin A Supplementation
total oblivion to the danger presented at the lower end of
Consider the study of vitamin A supplementation in the range. The instrumental variables estimate advocated by
northern Sumatra described by Sommer et al. (1986) and Angrist et al. (1996) calculates to .0035, which further exSommer and Zeger (1991). In this study, out of 450 vil- aggerates the illusionary benefits of vitamin A supplement.
lages, 221 were randomly assigned to the control group and
The techniques described in earlier work (Balke and
the remaining 229 were assigned to the treatment group. In Pearl 1994) may also be used to find a population mix that
the treatment group, oral doses of vitamin A were admin- would explain a particular value of the causal effect magistered in the population at 2-3 months and once again at nitude. For example, one may wish to investigate the be6 months; because of government policy, the control group havioral characteristics, consistent with the observed data,
was not administered a placebo. At 12 months after the that would support a detrimental effect of ACE(D -. Y) ==
original census, the mortality (Yo) of the population was -.1946 shown possible at the extreme lower end of the
determined from the time at which the initial dose was ad- range. For the most part, the population under study would
ministered. Table 1 presents the final subject counts in terms have to be composed of two homogeneous groups. In one
of our partial compliance model notation. Table 2 presents group, consisting of almost 80% of the population, all subthe probability distribution estimated from the counts in Ta- jects would survive regardless of treatment and would comble 1, making the large-sample assumption and taking the ply perfectly with their treatment assignment. In the other
sample frequencies as representing P(y, dlz).
group, consisting of almost 20% of the population, subjects
By computing the quantities required for (4) and (5), we would die if (and only if) they take vitamin A supplements,
and, not surprisingly, these subjects would refuse vitamin
obtain
A supplements under the conditions prevailing in the study.
The ability to associate a population mix with any ACE
ACE(D ~ Y) ;:::: max { -.1946, -.1982, -.9972, -.9936,} value provides a vantage point from which the plausibility
-.9910, -1.9898, -.2018, -.3928
of that ACE value can be assessed.
=-.1946
4.2

and
ACE(D ~ Y) ;:::: min { .0054, .8028, .0064, .8018, }
.0102, .0090, .8072, 1.5982

= .0054.
Table 1. Count of Children Classified According to Ti'eatment Assigned
(z), Treatment Consumed (d), and Mortality Outcome (y).

Zo
N(Y,d,z)

Yo

Yl

Yo

Yl

74

11,514

o

o

34
12

2,385
9,663

Coronary Primary Prevention Trial

Consider the Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary
Prevention Trial data. (See Lipid Research Clinic Program
1984 for an extended description of the clinical trial.) A
portion of this dataset consisting of 337 subjects was analyzed by Efron and Feldman (1991) using a parametric
model; we use the same dataset in our analysis. A population of subjects was assembled, and two preliminary
cholesterol measurements were obtained: one prior to a suggested low-cholesterol diet (continuous variable GIl) and
one following the diet period (G12)' The initial cholesterol level (G1) was taken as a weighted average of these
two measures: G1 =.25GIl + .75G12 . The subjects were
randomized into two treatment groups: subjects receiving
cholestyramine (zd and subjects receiving a placebo (zo).
During several years of treatment, each subject's choles-

1175

Balke and Pearl: Bounds on Treatment Effects

terollevel was measured multiple times, and the average of
these measurements was used as the posttreatment cholesterol level (continuous variable OF). The compliance of
each subject was determined by tracking the quantity of
prescribed dosage consumed (continuous variable B). The
maximum consumption in the dataset was 101 units.
To apply our analysis to this study, we discretize the continuous data obtained in the Lipid Research Clinic Program
(1984) study in the following way:

ifz=zoorb=O
if Z= Zl and 87
otherwise

~

b ~ 101

(8)

5.

Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg] at 05:32 19 November 2012

and

Yo if
Y- { Yl if

CI -

CF

CI -

CF

.<.38
2': 38.

(9)

This discretization assumes that each subject's response to
treatment is homogeneous between 87 and 101 units of
cholestyramine. In addition, (8) reflects the finding that subjects assigned placebo (zo) did not take cholestyraminenamely, P(d1Izo) = P(dmlz o) = O. The threshold of 38 in
(9) was chosen arbitrarily. Clearly, by varing this threshold over the range of Y, one obtains upper and lower
bounds on the entire distribution of the treatment effect,
P(Y ~ yld1 ) - P(Y ~ Yldo).
If the sample data are interpreted according to (8) and
(9), then the conditional distribution over (Z, D, Y) results
in the distribution given in Table 3. (Here we make the
large-sample assumption and take the sample frequencies
as representing P(y, dlz).)
By computing the quantities required for (4), we obtain
ACE(D

--4

.262, -.685, -.976, -.029, }
.233, -.902, -1.632, -.423

Y)

= .262.
Those needed for (5) give us
ACE(D

--4

Y) < min { .868,1.000, .971, .897, }
1.680, 1.815, 1.765, .926

= .868.

Accordingly, we conclude that the average treatment effect lies in the range
.262 < ACE(D

--4

Y)

s .868,

which is quite informative. The experimenter can categorically state that when applied uniformly to the population,
a cholestyramine dosage of 84-101 units is guaranteed to
Table 3. Conditional Probability Distribution P(y,dlz) for the Lipid
Research Clinic Program (1984) Data. made Discrete by (8) and (9).

Zo

z1

P(y,dlz)

Yo

Y1

Yo

Y1

do
dm
d1

.971
0

.029
0
0

.024
.436
.103

0
.146
.291

0

increase by at least 26.2% the probability of reducing a
patient's level of cholesterol by 38 points or more. This
guarantee is established despite the fact that 60.6% of the
subjects in the treatment group did not comply with their assigned dosage level. For comparison, note that the intent-totreat analysis in this study gives P(Yllzd -P(Yllzo) = .408,
meaning that enforcing full compliance might result in as
much as 46% improvement and no more than 14.6% reduction in the proportion of patients benefiting from the
treatment.

CONCLUSION

In an attempt to avert confounding bias in randomized
studies involving noncompliance, analysts usually advocate
using "intent-to-treat" analysis, which compares assignment
groups regardless of the treatment actually received. Estimates derived by such analysis are free of confounding
bias, but decisions based on these estimates require that the
experimental conditions perfectly mimic the conditions prevailing in the final implementation of the treatment. In particular, the intent-to-treat analysis is inappropriate when the
inducement to receive treatment changes from what it was
in the study-for example, when a drug is officially endorsed by a well"meaning authority.
A similar weakness applies to the analysis of Angrist
et al. (1996), who derived causal effect formulas for the
unobservable subpopulation of "responsive" subjects; that
is, subjects who would have changed treatment status if
given a different assignment. This subpopulation cannot
serve as a basis for policy analysis because it is instrument
dependent-individuals who are responsive in the study
may not remain responsive in the field, where the incentives for obtaining treatment differ from those used in the
study.
In policy evaluation studies, field incentives are normally
more compelling than experimental incentives. Hence treatment effectiveness should be assessed by the average causal
effect, Eu[P(Yllu, dd-P(Yllu, do)], for which we have provided sharp theoretical bounds. Estimates based solely on
intent-to-treat analysis, as well as those based on instrumental variables, can be misleading, as they may lie entirely
outside the theoretical bounds. The formulas established in
this article provide instrument-independent guarantees for
policy analysis and should enable analysts to determine the
extent to which efforts to enforce compliance may increase
the overall treatment effectiveness.
A topic that should receive considerable attention in
future work is the augmentation of the bounds in (4)(5) with confidence intervals, to account for sample variability. Chickering and Pearl (1996) described a Bayesian
method that, using Gibbs sampling, computes the posterior distribution of ACE(D --4 Y) given the data. An alternative approach in this direction is offered by the maximum likelihood ratio test, as applied to the hypothesis H o:
ACE( D --4 Y) < t, for arbitrary t, because the maximum
likelihood function under Ho can be computed using linear
programming.

Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1997

1176

[Received October 1993. Revised.December 1996.J

Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Freiburg] at 05:32 19 November 2012

REFERENCES
Angrist, 1. D., Imbens, G. W. and Rubin, D. B. (1996), "Identification of
Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables" (with comments), Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444-472.
Balke, A. (1995), "Probabilistic Counterfactuals: Semantics, Computation,
and Applications," Technical Report R-242, University of California,
Los Angeles, Computer Science Dept.
Balke, A., and Pearl, J. (1993), "Nonparametric Bounds on Causal Effects
From Partial Compliance Data," Technical Report R-199, University of
California, Los Angeles, Computer Science Dept.
- - , (1994), "Counterfactual Probabilities: Computational Methods,
Bounds and Applications," in Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, San Francisco: Morgan Kauffman,
pp.46-54.
Chickering, D. M., and Pearl, J. (1996), "A Clinician's Tool for Analyzing
Non-Compliance," in Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-96), Boston: Morgan Kauffman, pp. 1269-1276.
Efron, B., and Feldman, D. (1991), "Compliance as an Explanatory Variable in Clinical Trials," Journal of the American Statistical Association,
86,9-26.
Holland, P. W. (1988), "Causal Inference, Path Analysis, and Recursive Structural Equations Models," in Sociological Methodology, ed. C.

Clogg, Washington, DC: American Sociological Association, pp. 449484.
Lipid Research Clinic Program (1984), "The Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary Prevention Trial Results, Parts I and II," Journal of the
American Medical Association, 251, 351-374.
Manski, C. F. (1990), "Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects,"
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 80, 319-323.
Pearl, J. (1994), "On the Testability of Causal Models With Latent and
Instrumental Variables," in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 11, eds.
P. Besnard and S. Hanks, San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 435443.
- - - (1995a), "Causal Diagrams for Experimental Research," (with dis- .
cussion, Biometrika, 82, 669-710.
- - - (1995b), "Causal Inference From Indirect Experiments," Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine, 7, 561-582.
Robins, J. M. (1989), "The analysis of Randomized and Non-Randomized
AIDS Treatment Trials Using a New Approach to Causal Inference in
Longitudinal Studies," in Health Service Research Methodology: A Focus
on AIDS, eds. L. Sechrest, H. Freeman, and A. Mulley, Washington, DC:
U.S. Public Health Service, pp. 113-159.
Sommer, A., Tarwotjo, I., Djunaedi, E., West, K. P., Leodin, A. A., Tilden,
R., and Mele, I. (1986), "Impact of Vitamin A Supplementation on
Childhood Mortality: A Randomized Controlled Community Trial," The
Lancet, 1169-1173.
Sommer, A., and Zeger, S. L. (1991), "On Estimating Efficacy From Clinical Trials," Statistics in Medicine, 10, 45-52.

