Principal Stratification Approach to Broken Randomized Experiments: A Case Study of
School Choice Vouchers in New York City
Author(s): John Barnard, Constantine E. Frangakis, Jennifer L. Hill and Donald B. Rubin
Source: Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 98, No. 462 (Jun., 2003), pp.
299-311
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of the American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/30045238
Accessed: 20-02-2019 18:42 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of the American Statistical Association

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Principal Stratification Approach to Broken
Randomized Experiments: A Case Study
of School Choice Vouchers in New York City
John BARNARD, Constantine E. FRANGAKIS, Jennifer L. HILL, and Donald B. RUBIN
The precarious state of the educational system in the inner cities of the United States, as well as its potential causes and solutions, have been

popular topics of debate in recent years. Part of the difficulty in resolving this debate is the lack of solid empirical evidence regarding the
true impact of educational initiatives. The efficacy of so-called "school choice" programs has been a particularly contentious issue. A current

multimillion dollar program, the School Choice Scholarship Foundation Program in New York, randomized the distribution of vouchers in
an attempt to shed some light on this issue. This is an important time for school choice, because on June 27, 2002 the U.S. Supreme Court
upheld the constitutionality of a voucher program in Cleveland that provides scholarships both to secular and religious private schools.
Although this study benefits immensely from a randomized design, it suffers from complications common to such research with human
subjects: noncompliance with assigned "treatments" and missing data. Recent work has revealed threats to valid estimates of experimental
effects that exist in the presence of noncompliance and missing data, even when the goal is to estimate simple intention-to-treat effects. Our

goal was to create a better solution when faced with both noncompliance and missing data. This article presents a model that accommodates
these complications that is based on the general framework of "principal stratification" and thus relies on more plausible assumptions than
standard methodology. Our analyses revealed positive effects on math scores for children who applied to the program from certain types of

schools-those with average test scores below the citywide median. Among these children, the effects are stronger for children who applied
in the first grade and for African-American children.

KEY WORDS: Causal inference; Missing data; Noncompliance; Pattern mixture models; Principal stratification; Rubin causal model;
School choice.

1. INTRODUCTION

Coulson (1999). A collection of essays that report mainly
itive school choice effects has been published by Peterson
There appears to be a crisis in America's public schools.
Hassel (1998). Recent critiques of school choice include th
"More than half of 4th and 8th graders fail to reach the most
by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teach
minimal standard on national tests in reading, math, and sci-

(1992), Cookson (1994), Fuller and Elmore (1996), and L
(1998).
level work" (Education Week 1998). The problem is worse
In this article we evaluate a randomized experiment
in high poverty urban areas. For instance, although only 43%
ducted in New York City made possible by the privately-fu
of urban fourth-graders achieved a basic level of skill on a
School Choice Scholarships Foundation (SCSF). The SC
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) reading
program provided the first opportunity to examine the

ence, meaning that they probably have difficulty doing grade-

test, a meager 23% of those in high-poverty urban schools met
tion of the potential for improved school performance (as
as parental satisfaction and involvement, school mobility
One of the most complicated and contentious of educational
racial integration) in private schools versus public schools
reforms currently being proposed is school choice.
ingDebates
a carefully designed and monitored randomized field ex
about the equity and potential efficacy of school choice
have
in- studies were observational in nature and thus subiment.
Earlier

this standard.

creased in intensity over the past few years. Authors
making
a
ject
to selection
bias (i.e., nonignorable treatment assignment).
case for school choice include Cobb (1992), Brandl (1998),
and
Studies finding positive educational benefits from attending pri-

vate schools include those of Coleman, Hoffer, and Kilgore
Chubb and Moe (1990), and Derek (1997). Critiques

(1982),
John Barnard is Senior Research Statistician, deCODE Genetics, Waltham,

MA-02451 (E-mail: john.barnard@decode.is). Constantine E. Frangakis
is
of these
studies include those of Goldberger and Cain (1982)

Assistant Professor, Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University,
and

Wilms (1985). On June 27, 2002, the U.S. Supreme Court
the constitutionality of a voucher program in Cleveland
that
provides
scholarships both to secular and religious private
sity, New York, NY 10027 (E-mail: jhl030@columbia.edu). Donald B. Rubin

Baltimore, MD 21205 (E-mail: cfrangak@jhsph.edu). Jennifer L. Hill is As-

upheld
sistant Professor, School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia Univer-

is John L. Loeb Professor of Statistics and Chair, Department of Statistics,schools.
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 (E-mail: rubin@stat.harvard.edu). The

As occurs in most research involving human subjects, how-

authors thank the editor, an associate editor, and three reviewers for very help-

ever, our study, although carefully implemented, suffered from
ful comments; David Myers and Paul E. Peterson as principal coinvestigators

for this evaluation; and the School Choice Scholarships Foundation (SCSF) complications
for
cooperating fully with this evaluation. The work was supported in part by Na-

due to missing background and outcome data and

also to noncompliance with the randomly assigned treatment.

tional Institutes of Health (NIH) grant RO1 EY 014314-01, National Science
We
Foundation grants SBR 9709359 and DMS 9705158; and by grants from
thefocus on describing and addressing these complications in
following foundations: Achelis Foundation, Bodman Foundation, Lyndeour
and study using a Bayesian approach with the framework of
Harry Bradley Foundation, Donner Foundation, Milton and Rose D. Friedman
principal
Foundation, John M. Olin Foundation, David and Lucile Packard Foundation,

stratification (Frangakis and Rubin 2002).
describe the study in Section 2 and summarize its data
complications in Section 3. In Section 4 we place the study in

We
Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Spencer Foundation. The authors also

thank Kristin Kearns Jordan and other members of the SCSF staff for their co-

operation and assistance with data collection, and Daniel Mayer and Julia Kim,
from Mathematica Policy Research, for preparing the survey and test score data
and answering questions about that data. The methodology, analyses of data,
reported findings and interpretations of findings are the sole responsibility of
the authors and are not subject to the approval of SCSF or of any foundation
providing support for this research.

@ 2003 American Statistical Association
Journal of the American Statistical Association

June 2003, Vol. 98, No. 462, Applications and Case Studi

299

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

DOI 10.1198/016214503000071

300 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 2003

Table 1. Sample Sizes in the SCSF Program
the context of broken randomized experiments, a phrase appa

ently first coined by Barnard, Du, Hill, and Rubin (1998). W

Family Randomized block

size use
Treatment
PMPD 1 2 3
4 Subtotal
Total
discuss the framework that we
in Section
5.
We present
ou

model's structural assumptions
inScholarship
Section353
6,72and
parametr
Single
65 82 its
104 323
676
353 72results
65 82 104of
323the
676 anal
assumptions in Section 7. We giveControl
the main
Multi Scholarship 147
44 27 31 in
75 177
324
sis in Section 8 (with some supplementary
results
the
Appen
Control 147 27 23 33 54 137 284

dix). We discuss model building and checking in Section 9, an
Total

conclude the article in Section 10.

1,000

960

1,960

2. THE SCHOOL CHOICE SCHOLARSHIPS

FOUNDATION PROGRAM

For period 1 and single
Barnard, Frangakis, Hill
In February 1997 the SCSF announced that it would provide
the balance achieved on
1,300 scholarships to private school to "eligible" low-income
and two other possible d
families. Eligibility required that the children, at the time
of
and
a stratified random
application, be living in New York City, entering gradesthe
1-5,
pool of all potential
currently attending a public school, and from families with
inSTRS,
the strata are the
comes low enough to qualify for free school lunch. That spring,
indicates whether the ap
SCSF received applications from more than 20,000 students.
that had average test s
To participate in the lottery that would award the scholarships,
citywide median in the
a family had to attend a session during which (1) their eligiparison in Table 2 are Z
bility was confirmed, (2) a questionnaire of background arms.
charOverall, the PMPD
acteristics was administered to the parents/guardians, and21
(3) a
variables compared w
pretest was administered to the eligible children. The finalance
lotwas better in 11 va
tery, held in May 1997, was administered by Mathematicacompared
Polwith the STR
icy Research (MPR), and the SCSF offered winning families
larger in the former cas
help in finding placements in private schools.
demonstrates balance fo
Details of the design have been described by Hill, Rubin,
and
were
part of a standard
Thomas (2000). The final sample sizes of children are displayed
blocks were each of the f
in Table 1. PMPD refers to the randomized design developed
for
size
and by applicant's sc
this study (propensity matched pairs design). This design relies
More generally, the ent
on propensity score matching (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983),
sign where the assignme
which was used to choose a control group for the families
in
following
design variabl
the first application period, where there were more applicants
school, family size (singl
that did not win the scholarship than could be followed.timated
The
propensity scor
"single" and "multi" classifications describe families thatformation
have
on the design
one child and more than one child participating in the program.
on the study's main data

Table 2. Design Comparisons in Balance of Back
Z Statistics From Comparing Observed Va

Application period 1 Periods 2-5

Simple Stratified Randomized
Variable random sample random sample PMPD block
Applicant's school (low/high) -.98 0 .11 .21
Grade

level

Pretest

read

score

math

score

Pretest

-1.63

African-American
Mother's

.03

-.38

-.51
1.80

education

-.03

.65

.48

1.17
1.68

.16

-.39

-1.05

.20

-1.37
1.74
.09 1.67

1.59

.14

In special education .31 1.66 -.17 .22
In gifted program .42 -1.16 -.13 .75
English main language -1.06 -.02 -1.03 -.44
AFDC

Food

-.28

stamps

Mother

.49

-1.08

works

.83

-.27

-1.26

-.30

-1.57

.94

-1.31

-1.18

.40

Educational expectations .50 1.79 .57 .19

Children in household -1.01 -1.75 .41 -1.02
Child born in U.S. .49 .73 -1.40 -.69

Length of residence .42 .71 .66 -.78
Father's work missing 1.09 .70 0 .16
Catholic religion -1.84 -.19 -.74 -.80
Male

.88
1.22
-.38
-.62

Income

Age

as

of

4/97

-1.57

.76
.53
-1.21

.74

.18

-.47

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

-.87

Barnard et al.: Principal Stratification Approach to Broken Randomized Experiments 301
3. DATA COMPLICATIONS

have been spent instructing them on how to take a test, and

there was concern that separating such young children from
The data that we use include the design variables, the backtheir guardians in this new environment might lead to behavground survey collected at the verification sessions, pretest data,
ioral issues. Hence we focus our analyses on the children who
and posttest data collected the following spring. The test scores
applied in first grade or above. Second, we do not yet have
used as outcomes in our analyses are grade-normed national
complete compliance data for the multichild families. Consepercentile rankings of reading and math scores from the Iowa
all analyses reported in this article are further limited
Test of Basic Skills (ITBS). The ITBS was used becausequently,
it is not
to results
for the 1,050 single-child families who were in grades
the test administered in the New York City public school
sys1-4 atwith
the time of the spring 1997 application process.
tem, which reduces the possibility of teachers in schools

participating children "teaching to the test."
Attempts to reduce missingness of data included requiring at-

tendance at the initial verification sessions and providing finan-

4. THE STUDY AS A BROKEN
RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT

cial incentives to attend the follow-up testing sessions.The
Despite
foregoing deviations from the study's protocol cla
these attempts, missingness of background variables that
did occur
our experiment does not really randomize attendance

before randomization. In principle, such missingness
is alsorandomizes
a
rather
the "encouragement," using financial
covariate and so does not directly create imbalance ofport,
subjects
to attend a private school rather than a public sch
between randomized arms, although it does create loss
in effi- as in most encouragement studies, interest her
Moreover,
ciency when, as in this study, background covariates
are not
usedonly on the effect of encouragement itself (whic
cuses

in the analysis. For example, for single-child families,
dependdepend
on what percentage of people encouraged would a
ing on application period and background strata, 34%-51%
of
ally participate if the voucher program were to be more b
the children's pretest scores were missing at the timeimplemented),
of design
but also on the effect of the treatment b
planning. Since then, MPR has processed and provided
an adencouraged-here,
attending private versus public schools
ditional 7% and 14% of the reading and mathematics
pretest
there
were perfect compliance, so that all those encourag

scores. These scores were not as balanced between arms as

attend private school actually
when choosing the design (see Table 2), although the difference
aged stayed in public school,
was not statistically significant at conventional levels. Hence we
typically would be attributed
used all available pretest scores in the final analysis that is contendance, rather than simply

ditional on these scores.

did so and all those not so en

then the effect being estim

to private versus public scho
to the encouragement.

We focus on defining and estimating two estimands

Outcomes were also incomplete. Among the observed outintention-to-treat (ITT) effect, the effect of the randomiz
comes in single-child families, the average (standard deviation)
couragement on all subjects; and the complier average ca
was 23.5 (22.5) percentile rankings for mathematics and 28.1
effect (CACE), the effect of the randomized encourageme
(23.9) percentile rankings for reading, and unadjusted comall subjects who would comply with their treatment assign
parisons between randomized arms do not point to a notable
no matter which assignment they would be given (here, the
difference. However, in contrast to missingness of background
dren who would have attended private school if they had
variables, missingness of outcomes that occurs after randoma scholarship and would not have attended had they not
ization is not guaranteed to be balanced between the randoma scholarship). These quantities are defined more formal
ized arms. For example, depending on application period and
Section 8.

background strata, 18%-27% of the children did not provide

In recent years there has been substantial progress in the
posttest scores, and during design periods 2-5, the response
analysis of encouragement designs, based on building bridges
is higher among scholarship winners (80%) than among the
between statistical and econometric approaches to causal inother children (73%). Analyses that would be limited to comference. In particular, the widely accepted approach in statisplete cases for these variables and the variables used to calculate
tics to formulating causal questions is in terms of "potential
the propensity score would discard more than half of the units.
outcomes." Although this approach has roots dating back to
Moreover, standard adjustments for outcome missingness igNeyman
and Fisher in the context of perfect randomized expernore its potential interaction with the other complications and
iments
(Neyman
1923; Rubin 1990), it is generally referred to
generally make implicit and unrealistic assumptions.
as
Rubin's
causal
model (Holland 1986) for work extending the
Another complication was noncompliance; attendance at a
framework
to
observational
studies (Rubin 1974, 1977) and inprivate school was not perfectly correlated with winning a
cluding
modes
of
inference
other than randomization-basedscholarship. For example, for single-child families, and depending on application period and background strata, 20%-27% ofin particular, Bayesian (Rubin 1978a, 1990). In economics, the

technique of instrumental variables, due to Tinbergen (1930)
children who won scholarships did not use them (scholarships
were in the amount of $1,400, which generally did not fullyand Haavelmo (1943), has been a main tool of causal inference
in the type of nonrandomized studies prevalent in that field. Ancover tuition at a private school), and 6%-10% of children that
grist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996) showed how the approaches
did not win scholarships were sent to private schools nevertheless.
can be viewed as completely compatible, thereby clarifying and
strengthening each approach. The result was an interpretation
Two additional complications limit our analysis sample.

First, no pretest scores were obtained for applicants in kinderof the instrumental variables technology as a way to approach a

garten, because these children most likely had never been exrandomized experiment that suffers from noncompliance, such
posed to a standardized test, hence considerable time would as a randomized encouragement design.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

302 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 2003

5. PRINCIPAL
STRATIFICATION
SCHOOL
In encouragement designs with
compliance
as INthe
only pa
AND ROLE
FOR CAUSAL
tially uncontrolled factor, andCHOICE
where
there
are INFERENCE
full outcom
data, Imbens and Rubin (1997) extended the Bayesian appro
To make explicit the assumptions necessary for valid
to causal inference of Rubin (1978a) to handle simple rando
inference in this study, we first introduce "potential out
ized experiments with noncompliance, and Hirano, Imbens,
(see Rubin 1979; Holland 1986) for all of the posttrea
bin, and Zhou (2000) further extended the approach to han
variables. Potential outcomes for any given variable rep
fully observed covariates.
the observable manifestations of this variable under each
In encouragement designs with more than one partially un
sible treatment assignment. In particular, if child i in our
controlled factor, as with noncompliance and missing outcom

(i = 1 ... n) is to be assigned to treatment z (1 for pr

in our study, defining and estimating treatment effects of int

school and 0 for public school), we denote the following:
est becomes more challenging.
Existing
Robi
for the
indicator equalmethods
to 1 if the child(e.g.,
attends private
s

Greenland, and Hu 1999) are
for
studies
that
and 0designed
if the child attends
public
school; Yi (z)
for the d
p
fer from our study in the goals and the degree of control
tial outcomes if the child were to take the tests; and Ryi
the aforementioned factors. the
(For
a detailed
comparison
ofWe
su
indicators
equal to 1 if the
child takes the tests.

frameworks, see Frangakis and
Rubin
2002.)
R
by Zi the
indicator
equal to 1Frangakis
for the observed and
assignm
bin (1999) studied a more flexible
framework
for
encourag
private school or not, and let Di = Di (Zi), Yi = Yi (Zi

ment designs with both noncompliance to treatment and m
Ryi = Ryi (Zi) designate the actual type of school, the ou
ing outcomes, and showed that
estimation
of either
the
to be for
recorded
by the test, and whether
or not the child
tak
effect or CACE, one cannot test
inunder
general
obtain
valid
estimat
the observed assignment.
using standard ITT analyses (i.e.,
analyses
that
ignore
dataof
The notation
for these and
the remaining
definitions
compliance behavior) or standard
IV
analyses
(i.e.,
those
th
vant variables in this study are summarized in Table
3.

ignore the interaction between
compliance
behavior
study the
outcomes are reading
and math test and
scores, ou
so t
come missingness). They also
provided
consistent
mome
mension of Yi (z) equals two, although more generally our
based estimators that can estimate both ITT and CACE under
plate allows for repeated measurements over time.
assumptions more plausible than those underlying more stanOur design variables are application period, low/high
dard methods.
cators for the applicant's school, grade level, and prope
Barnard et al. (1998) extended that template to allow for
score. In addition, corresponding to each set of these indi
missing covariate and multivariate outcome values; theyspecific random variables is a variable (vector or matrix),
stopped short, however, of introducing specific methodology
out subscript i, that refers to the set of these variables
for this framework. We present a solution to a still more chalall study participants. For example, Z is the vector of tre
lenging situation in which we have a more complicated form of
assignments for all study participants with ith element
noncompliance-some children attend private school without X is the matrix of partially observed background variable
receiving the monetary encouragement (thus receiving treatith row Xi.
ment without having been assigned to it). Under assumptions The variable Ci (see Table 3), the joint vector of treatment
similar to those of Barnard et al. (1998), we next fully develop
receipt under both treatment assignments, is particularly ima Bayesian framework that yields valid estimates of quantitiesportant. Specifically, Ci defines four strata of people: compliers, who take the treatment if so assigned and take control if so
of interest and also properly accounts for our uncertainty about
assigned; never takers, who never take the treatment no matter
these quantities.

Table 3. Notation for the ith Subject

Notation

Specifics

General

description

Zi 1 if i assigned treatment Binary indicator of treatment assignment
0 if i assigned control

Di(z) 1 if i receives treatment under assignment z Potential outcome formulation of treatment receipt
0 if i receives control under assignment z

Di Di(Zi) Binary indicator of treatment receipt
Ci c if Di(0) = 0 and Di(1) = 1 Compliance principal stratum: c = complier; n = never taker;

n if Di(O) = 0 and Di(1) = 0 a = always taker; d = defier

a if Di(0)= 1 and Di(1)= 1
d if Di(O)= 1 and Di(1)= 0

Yi(z) (Y~math)(Z), yiread)(z)) Potential outcomes for math and readin

Yi (Y(math) (Z1), (read)(Zi)) Math and reading outcomes under observed a

Rymath) (math) 1 if y(math)(Z) would be observed Response indicator for yi(math)(z) under

0 if Yimath (z) would not be observed similarly forRyread)

Ryi(z) (Ry ath), Ry read(z)) Vector of response indicators for Yi(z)

Ryi (Ryf math) Zi), Ryread)(Zi)) Vector of response indicators for Yi
Wi (Wil ..., WiK) Fully observed background and design variables
Xi (Xil, ..., Xio) Partially observed background variables
Rxi (Rxil,..., Rxio) Vector of response indicators for Xi

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Barnard et al.: Principal Stratification Approach to Broken Randomized Experiments 303

the assignment; always takers, who always the
take
the treatment
variables.
There is no dependence on 0, because there ar
no matter the assignment; and defiers, who
the opposite
of governing the treatment-assignme
nodo
unknown
parameters
the assignment no matter its value. These strata
are not MPR
fully
obmechanism.
assigned
the scholarships by lottery, an
served, in contrast to observed strata of actual
assignmentprobabilities
and
the randomization
within for applicant's schoo

attendance (Zi, Di). For example, children
who are
(low/high)
andobserved
application period are known.
to attend private school when winning the lottery are a mixture

Noncompliance
Process Assumptions: Monotonicity
of compliers (Ci = c) and always takers (Ci 6.3
= a).
Such explicit

andof
Compound
Exclusion
stratification on Ci dates back at least to the work
Imbens and

Rubin (1997) on randomized trials with noncompliance,
was
We assume monotonicity,
that there are no "defiers"-that

generalized and taxonomized by Frangakis and Rubin (2002)

is, for all i, Di(1) > Di(0) (Imbens and Angrist 1994).

to posttreatment variables in partially controlled
is would be families who would not
the SCSFstudies,
program,and
defiers
termed a "principal stratification" based onuse
the
posttreatment
a scholarship if they won one, but would pay to go to privat

variables.

school if they did not win a scholarship. It seems implausib
The principal strata Ci have two important properties. First,
that such a group of people exists; therefore, the monotonicit
they are not affected by the assigned treatment. Second, comassumption appears to be reasonable for our study.
parisons of potential outcomes under different assignments
By definition, the never takers and always takers will par
within principal strata, called principal effects, are well-defined
ticipate in the same treatment (control or treatment) regar

causal effects (Frangakis and Rubin 2002). These properties

less of which treatment they are randomly assigned. For th
make principal stratification a powerful framework for evalureason, and to facilitate estimation, we assume compound ex
ation, because it allows us to explicitly define estimands that
clusion: The outcomes and missingness of outcomes for nev
better represent the effect of attendance in the presence of nontakers and always takers are not affected by treatment assig
compliance, and to explore richer and explicit sets of assumpment. This compound exclusion restriction (Frangakis and Ru
tions that allow estimation of these effects under more plausible
bin 1999) generalizes the standard exclusion restriction (An-

than standard conditions. Sections 6 and 7 discuss such a set of

more flexible assumptions and estimands.
6. STRUCTURAL ASSUMPTIONS

grist et al. 1996; Imbens and Rubin 1997) and can be express
formally for the distributions as

p(Y(1), Ry(l) I Xobs, Rx, W, C = n)

First, we state explicitly our structural assumptions about the
= p(Y(0), Ry(0) I Xobs, Rx, W, C = n), for never takers
data with regard to the causal process, the missing data mechand
anism and the noncompliance structure. These assumptions
are

expressed without reference to a particular parametric distribup(Y(1), Ry(1) I Xobs, Rx, W, C = a)
tion and are the ones that make the estimands of interest identi-

= p(Y(0), Ry(0) I Xobs, Rx, W, C =a), for always takers.

fiable, as also discussed in Section 6.4.

6.1 Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption

Compound exclusion seems more plausible for never takers

than for always takers in this study. Never takers stayed in the
A standard assumption made in causal analyses is the
stable
public
school system whether they won a scholarship or not.
unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA), formalized with poAlthough a disappointment about winning a scholarship but still
tential outcomes by Rubin (1978a, 1980, 1990). SUTVA comnot being able to take advantage of it can exist, it is unlikely to
bines the no-interference assumption (Cox 1958) that one unit's
cause notable differences in subsequent test scores or response
treatment assignment does not affect another unit's behaviors.
outcomes
with the assumption that there are "no versions of treatments."
Always takers, on the other hand, might have been in one
For the no-interference assumption to hold, whether or not one
private school had they won a scholarship or in another if they
family won a scholarship should not affect another family's outhad not, particularly because those who won scholarships had
comes, such as their choice to attend private school or their chilaccess to resources to help them find an appropriate private
dren's test scores. We expect our results to be robust to the types
school and had more money (up to $1,400) to use toward tuand degree of deviations from no interference that might be anition. In addition, even if the child had attended the same priticipated in this study. To satisfy the "no versions of treatments,"
vate school under either treatment assignment, the extra $1,400
we need to limit the definition of private and public schools to
in family resources for those who won the scholarship could
those participating in the experiment. Generalizability of the rehave had an effect on student outcomes. However, because in
sults to other schools must be judged separately.
our application the estimated percentage of always takers is so
6.2 Randomization
small (approximately 9%)-an estimate that is robust, due to

the randomization, to relaxing compound exclusion-there is
We assume that scholarships have been randomly assigned.
reason to believe that this assumption will not have a substanThis implies that
tial impact on the results.

p(Z I Y(1), Y(0), X, W, C, Ry(0), Ry(1), Rx, 0)

Under the compound exclusion restriction, the ITT comparison of all outcomes Yi (0) versus Yi (1) includes the null com-

= p(Z I W*, 0) = p(ZI W*),

parison among the subgroups of never takers and always takers.
where W* represents the design variables in W and 0 is Moreover,
generic
by monotonicity, the compliers (Ci = c) are the only
notation for the parameters governing the distribution
of all
group
of children who would attend private school if and only if

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

304 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 2003

offered the scholarship. For C
this
themselves
reason,
represent randomized
weexperiments.
take With
the
our exCACE (I
periment's
size, however,
performing completely
sepabens and Rubin 1997), defined
assample
the
comparison
of
outcom
analyses on all of these
strata is not necessarily
or
Yi (0) versus Yi (1) among therate
principal
stratum
of desirable
compliers,
feasible. Therefore,
we consider
more parsimonious
modeling school
represent the effect of attending
public
versus
private

6.4 Latent Ignorability

approaches, which have the role of assisting, not creating, inference in the sense that results should be robust to different para-

metric specifications (Frangakis and Rubin 2001, rejoinder).
We assume that potential outcomes are independent of miss

ingness given observed covariates
conditional
on the
7. PARAMETRIC
PATTERN MIXTURE
MODEL compli
ance strata, that is,

Generally speaking, constrained estimation of separate an

ses within
missing-data
patterns
is the motivation behind
p(Ry(0), Ry(1) I Rx, Y(1), Y(0),
Xobs,
W,
C, O)

tern mixture modeling. Various authors have taken pattern m

= p(Ry(0), Ry(1) I Rx, Xobs, W, C, 0).

ture model approaches to missing data, including Little (1

1996),
Rubin of
(1978b),
and Glynn,
Laird, and Rubin (19
This assumption represents a
form
latent
ignorability
(L
Typically,
pattern
mixture
models
partition
data with
(Frangakis and Rubin 1999) in that it conditions on the
variable
spect to the missingness
the variables. Here wecomp
partition
that are (at least partially) unobserved
oroflatent-here

data with
to the
covariate
missing-data
patterns
R
ance principal strata C. We make
itrespect
here
first
because
it
is mo
well
as
compliance
principal
strata
C,
design
variables
W,
plausible than the assumption of standard ignorability (SI) (R

the main covariates
Xobs. This represents
a partialmaki
pattern
bin 1978a; Little and Rubin 1987),
and second,
because
ture
approach.
One
argument
in
favor
of
this
approach
is
it leads to different likelihood inferences.
it
focuses
the
model
on
the
quantities
of
interest
in
such
a
LI is more plausible than SI to the extent that it provides a

that parametric specifications for the marginal distributio
closer approximation to the missing-data mechanism. The intuRx, W, and Xobs can be ignored. To capitalize on the struc
ition behind this assumption in our study is that for a subgroup

of people with the same covariate missing-data patterns, Rx;assumptions, consider the factorization of the joint distribu
for the potential outcomes and compliance strata condition
similar values for covariates observed in that pattern, Xobs; and
the
covariates and their missing-data patterns,
the same compliance stratum C, a flip of a coin could deter-

mine which of these individuals shows up for a posttest. This is

p(Yi(O), Yi(1), Ryi(O), Ryi(1), Ci l Wi, X bs, Rxi, O)

a more reasonable assumption than SI, because it seems quite

p(Ci I Wi, Xubs, Rxi, 0(C))

likely that for example, compliers, would exhibit different at-

tendance behavior for posttests than, say, never takers (even

x p(Ryi(0), Ryi(1) I Wi, Xobs, Rxi, Ci, 0(R))

conditional on other background variables). Explorations of
raw data from this study across individuals with known compli-

xp(Yi(0), Yi(1) Wi, Xb1s, Rxi , Ci, (Y),

ance status provide empirical support that C is a strong factor in
where the product in the last line follows by latent ignorab

outcome missingness, even when other covariates are included
in the model. This fact is also supported by the literature forand 0 = ((C), 0(R), 0(Y))f. Note that the response pattern of
variates for each individual is itself a covariate. The param
noncompliance (see, e.g., The Coronary Drug Project Research
specifications for each of these components are described

Group 1980).

Regarding improved estimation, when LI (and the preceding
structural assumptions) hold but the likelihood is constructed
assuming SI, the underlying causal effects are identifiable (alternatively, the posterior distribution with increasing sample
size converges to the truth) only if the additional assumption is
made that within subclasses of subjects with similar observed
variables, the partially missing compliance principal stratum C

is not associated with potential outcomes. However, as noted
earlier, this assumption is not plausible.

7.1 Compliance Principal Stratum Submodel

The compliance status model contains two conditional pr
models, defined using indicator variables Ci (c) and Ci (n)
whether individual i is a complier or a never taker:

Ci(n) = 1 if Ci(n)* -gl(Wi, X bs, Rxi)f'(C 1) + Vi < 0
and

Ci(c) = 1 if Ci(n)* > 0

Theoretically, only the structural assumptions described ear-

lier are needed to identify the underlying ITT and CACE causal

and Ci(c)* = go(Wi, Xobs, Rxi)' (C'2) + Ui <

effects (Frangakis and Rubin 1999). Estimation based solely

where Vi - N(0, 1) and Ui - N(0, 1) independently.

on those identifiability relations in principle requires very large

and the pattern of missingness of the covariates, Rx, as well
as implicit conditioning (i.e., deconvolution of mixtures) on the
sometimes missing compliance principal stratum C. This works

The link functions, go and gl, attempt to strike a balanc
tween on the one hand including all of the design variabl
well as the variables regarded as most important either in
dicting compliance or in having interactions with the treat
effect and on the other hand maintaining parsimony. Th
sults discussed in Section 8 use a compliance component m

in large samples because covariate missingness and compli-

whose link function, gi, is linear in, and fits distinct parame

ance principal stratum are also covariates (i.e., defined pretreat-

for, an intercept, applicant's school (low/high), indicator
application period, propensity scores for subjects applyin

sample size and explicit conditioning (i.e., stratification) on the
subclasses defined by the observed part of the covariates, Xobs,

ment), so samples within subclasses defined by Xobs, Rx, and

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Barnard et al.: Principal Stratification Approach to Broken Randomized Experiments 305

the PMPD period and propensity scores for the
indicator
other
for whether
periods,
or not the pretest scores were available,
values
indicators for grade of the student, ethnicity (1
ifpretest
the score
child
orfor the subjects with available
scores,
propensity score
guardian identifies herself as African-American,
0 and
otherwise),
2. For the
of the
other periods: the variables in
an indicator for whether or not the pretest scores
of students
reading
and
item 1, along
with
indicators for application period
math were available, and the pretest scores (reading
and
math)
3. An indicatorscore
for whether
or not a person is an always taker
for the subjects with available scores. A propensity
for
4. An indicator for
whether
or not a person is a complier
the students not in the PMPD period is not necessary
from
the

5. For compliers
assigned treatment: an intercept, applidesign standpoint, and is in fact constant. However,
to increase
cant's school (low/high),
ethnicity, and indicators for the
efficiency, and to reduce bias due to missing outcomes,
here we

firstthese
three grades
(with the variable for the fourth-grade
include an "estimated propensity score value" for
periods,
treatment
effect
as
a function
calculated as the function derived for the propensity score
for of the already-included vari-

ables)

students in the PMPD period and evaluated at the covariate values for the students in the other periods as For
well.
Also,ofthe
fore-component, the link functhe variance
the outcome
going link function go is the same as gl except
that it
excludes
tion g3 includes
indicators
that saturate the cross-classification
the indicators for application period as well
as the
propensity
of whether
or not
a person applied in the PMPD period and
scores for applicants who did not apply inwhether
the PMPD
or not the period
pretest scores were available. This depenis needed
because each
pattern conditions on a different
(i.e., those for whom propensity score wasdence
not
a design
variset of covariates;
that is,
Xobs
varies from pattern to pattern.
able). This link function, a more parsimonious
version
of
one
The prior
the outcome submodel are
we used in earlier models, was more appropriate
todistributions
fit thefor
rel-

atively small proportion of always takers in this study. Finally,

(math) I (math) ~ N(0, F("(math)),I),

because the pretests were eitherjointly observed or jointly missing, one indicator for missingness of pretest scores is sufficient.

where F ((math)) = exp(1kmath))

The prior distributions for the compliance submodel are

k

.(math) (math)
(C, 1) , N((c, 1), 0(C, 1)}21) and (C, 2)-(math)
-- N(O,
{a(C 2)}21)
(math)
(math)
math), with one component

independently, where (a(C, 1))2 and (or(C, 2))2 are hyperpara-

of the K (in our case, K = 4) subgroups defined
meters set at 10 and ' 1) is a vector of Os with the excepclassifying the PMPD/non-PMPD classification and t
tion of the first element, which is set sing-data
equal to indicator
--1'(1/3)for
* pretest scores, and where y i

{a(c' 1)l/n 7-(g, igl,i) + 111/2, where gl,i
= gi(Wi,
parameter
setXbs,
at 10; and exp((math) inv2(, 2

Rxi) and n is our sample size. These priors reflect our a priori
invx2 (v, 02) refers to the distribution of the invers
ignorance about the probability that any individual belongs to
squared random variable with degrees of freedom v
each compliance status by approximately setting each of their
and scale parameter a2 (set at 400 based on prelimin
prior probabilities at 1/3.
mates of variances). The sets of values for these an
perparameters of the other model components were
7.2 Outcome Submodel
satisfying two criteria: giving posterior standard dev
We first describe the marginal distribution for the math
the outestimands in the neighborhood of the respective st
come y(math). To address the pile-up of many scores rors
of 0,of
weapproximate maximum likelihood estimate fit
posit the censored model
lar preliminary likelihood models and giving satisfact
checks (Sec. 9.2), and producing quick enough mixin
0 if yi(math), z) < 0
Bayesian analysis algorithm.
We specify the marginal distribution for reading
Yi(math) () -= 100 if Yi(math), *() > 100
y(read) in the same way as for the math outcome, wi
Yi(math),*(Z) otherwise,

mean and variance regression parameters 8 (read) an

where

Yi(math), () I Wi, Xobs, Rxi, Ci, 0(math)

"I N(g2(Wi, X bS, Rxi, Ci, z)'(math),
exp[g3 (X bs, Rxi, Ci, Z)'/T(math)])

for (math)*(1)
z =(math)
0, 1 and
0(math) - ( (math), -(math)). Here yi(math),
and
,( are assumed conditionally independent, an assumption that has no effect on inference for our superpopulation

parameters of interest (Rubin 1978a).
The results reported in Section 8 use an outcome component
model whose outcome mean link function, g2, is linear in distinct parameters for the following:

1. For the students of the PMPD design: an intercept, applicant's school (low/high), ethnicity, indicators for grade, an

*(0)

Finally, we allow that, conditionally on Wi, Xbs., Rxi, Ci, the
math and reading outcomes at a given assignment, Yi(math), *(Z)
and Yi(read), (z), may be dependent with an unknown correlation, p. We set the prior distribution for p to be uniform in
(- 1, 1) independently of the remaining parameters in their prior
distributions.

7.3 Outcome Response Submodel
As with the pretests, the outcomes on mathematics and reading were either jointly observed or jointly missing, thus one
indicator Ryi (z) for missingness of outcomes is sufficient for
each assignment z = 0, 1. For the submodel on this indicator,
we also use a probit specification,

Ryi (z) 1
if Ryi(z)* = g2(Wi, Xobs, Rxi, Ci, ?z)'(R) + Ei(z) > 0,

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

306 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 2003
Table 4. ITT Effect of Winning the Lottery on Math

where Ryi (0) and Ryi (1) are assumed conditionally indepenand Reading Test Scores 1

dent (using the same justification as for the potential outcomes) and where Ei (z) ~ N(0,
The link
function
of
the
Grade1).
at Applicant's
school: Low
Applicant's school:
High

probit model on the outcome application
response
g2 is
the
same
as the
Reading
Math
Reading
Math
link function for the mean of the outcome component. The
1 2.3(-1.3,5.8) 5.2(2.0,8.3) 1.4(-4.8, 7.2) 5.1(.1,10.3)
prior distribution for the outcome response submodel is (R)
2 .5(-2.6, 3.5) 1.3(-1.7,4.3) -.6(-6.2, 4.9) 1.0(-4.3,6.1)
N(0, {a(R)}21), where {or(R)12 is a hyperparameter set at 10.
3 .7(-2.7, 4.0) 3.3(-., 7.0) -.5(-6.0, 5.0) 2.5(-3.2,8.0)
8. RESULTS
4 3.0(-1.1,7.4) 3.1(-1.2,7.2) 1.8(-4.1,7.6) 2.3(-3.3,7.8)

Overall 1.5(-.6,3.6) 3.2(1.0,5.4) .4(-4.6,5.2) 2.8(-1.8,7.2)

All results herein were obtained from the same Bayesian
NOTE: Year Postrandomization Plain numbers are means, and numbers in parentheses are
analysis. We report results for the ITT and CACE estimands,
central 95% intervals of the posterior distribution of the effects on percentile rank.
for proportions of compliance principal strata, and for outcome
response rates. The reported estimands are not parameters of
Draw 0 and { Ci } from the posterior distribution (see
the model, but rather are functions of parameters and1.data.
App. A).
The results are reported by applicant's school (low/high) and
2. Calculate the expected causal effect E(Yi (1) - Yi (0)
grade. Both of these variables represent characteristics of children that potentially could be targeted differentially by govWip, Xbs, Ci, Rxi, 0) for each subject based on the model
in Section 7.2.
ernment policies. Moreover, each was thought to have possible
3. Average
the values of step 2 over the subjects in the subinteraction effects with treatment assignment. Except when
othclasses
of
WP with weights reflecting the known sampling
erwise stated, the plain numbers are posterior means, and the
numbers in parentheses are 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of theweights
pos- of the study population for the target population.
terior distribution.

These results indicate posterior distributions with mass primarily (>97.5%) to the right of 0 for the treatment effect on
math scores overall for children from low applicant schools, and
Here we address two questions:
also for the subgroup of first graders. Each effect indicates an
average
gain of greater than three percentile points for children
1. What is the impact of being offered a scholarship on stuwho
won
a scholarship. All of the remaining intervals cover 0.
dent outcomes, namely, the ITT estimand?
As
a
more
general pattern, estimates of effects are larger for
2. What is the impact of attending a private school on student
mathematics
than for reading and larger for children from lowoutcomes, namely, the CACE estimand?
applicant schools than for children from high-applicant schools.
The math and reading posttest score outcomes represent the
These results for the ITT estimand using the method of this
national percentile rankings within grade. They have been adarticle can also be contrasted with the results using a simpler
justed to correct for the fact that some children were kept bemethod reported in Table 5. The method used to obtain these rehind while others skipped a grade, because students transferring
sults is the same as that used in the initial MPR study (Peterson,
to private schools are hypothesized to be more likely to have
Myers, Howell, and Mayer 1999) but limited to the subset of
been kept behind by those schools. The individual-level causal
single-child families and separated out by applicant's school
estimates have also been weighted so that the subgroup causal
(low/high). This method is based on a linear regression of the
estimates correspond to the effects for all eligible children beposttest scores on the indicator of treatment assignment, ignorlonging to that subgroup who attended a screening session.
ing compliance data. In addition, the analysis includes the de8.1.1 Effect of Offering the Scholarship on Mathematics
and
sign variables
and the pretest scores and is limited to individuals
Reading. We examine the impact of being offered a scholarfor whom the pretest and posttest scores are known. Separate
ship (the ITT effect) on posttest scores. The corresponding
es- are run for math and reading posttest scores, and the
analyses
of such scores is adjusted by inverse probability
timand for individual i is defined as E(Yi (1) - Yi (0) I missingness
Wi, 0),
weighting.
where Wip denotes the policy variables grade level and
appli- Finally, weights are used to make the results for the
8.1 Test Score Results

cant's school (low/high) for that individual. The simulated
study
posparticipants generalizable to the population of all eligible
single-child families who were screened. (For more details of
To draw from this distribution, we take the following steps:
this method, see the appendix of Peterson et al. 1999.)

terior distribution of the ITT effect is summarized in Table 4.

Table 5. ITT Effect of Winning the Lottery on Test Scores, Estimated Using the Original
MPR Method

Grade at Applicant's school: Low Applicant's school: High
application Reading Math Reading Math

1 -1.0(-7.1,5.2) 2.1 (-2.6,6.7) 4.8(-10.0, 19.6) 2.6(-15.5, 20.7)
2 -.8(-4.9, 3.2) 2.0(-4.0,8.0) -3.4(-16.5,9.7) 2.7(-10.3,15.7)

3 3.2(_-1.7,8.1) 5.0(-.8, 10.7) -8.0(-25.4, 9.3) 4.0(-17.7, 25.6)

4 2.7(-3.5, 8.8) .3(-7.3, 7.9) 27.9(8.0,47.8) 22.7(-1.5,46.8)

Overall .6(-2.0, 3.2) 2.0(-.8,4.8) 1.1 (-7.0, 9.1) .3(-9.6, 10.1)
NOTE: Plain numbers are point estimates, and parentheses are 95% confidence intervals for the mean effects on
percentile rank.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Barnard et al.: Principal Stratification Approach to Broken Randomized Experiments 307
Table 6. Effect of Private School Attendance on Test Scores

Grade at Applicant's school: Low Applicant's school: High
application Reading Math Reading Math

1 3.4(-2.0,8.7) 7.7(3.0,12.4) 1.9(-7.3,10.3) 7.4(.2,14.6)
2 -7(-3.7,5.0) 1.9(-2.4,6.2) -.9(-9.4,7.3) 1.5(-6.2,9.3)

3 1.0(-4.1,6.1) 5.0(_.8,10.7) -.8(-9.5,7.7) 4.0(-4.9,12.5)

4 4.2(-1.5,10.1) 4.3(_1.6,10.1) 2.7(-6.3,11.3) 3.5(-4.7,11.9)

Overall 2.2(-.9, 5.3) 4.7(1.4, 7.9) .6(_7.1,7.7) 4.2(-2.6,10.9)

NOTE: Plain numbers are means, and parentheses are central 95% intervals of the posterior distribution of the effects
on percentile rank.

The results of the new method (Table 4) are generally more
from this distribution, we use step 1 described in Section 8.1.1
stable than those of the original method (Table 5), which and
in then calculate p(Ci = t I Wi, Xobs, Rxi, 8) for each subsome cases are not even credible. In the most extreme cases,ject
thebased on the model of Section 7.1 and average these values

as in step 3 of Section 8.1.1. The clearest pattern revealed by
original method estimates a 22.7-point gain [95% confidence
Table
interval, (-1.5, 46.8)] in mathematics and a 27.9-point gain 7 is that for three out of four grades, children who applied from low-applicant schools are more likely to be compli[95% confidence interval, (8.0, 47.8)] in reading for fourthor always takers than are children who applied from highgrade children from high-applicant schools. More generally,ers
the
applicant
schools.
new method's results display a more plausible pattern in comAs
stated
earlier, theoretically under our structural assumpparing effects in high-applicant versus low-applicant schools
tions,
standard
ITT analyses or standard IV analyses that use
and mathematics versus reading.
ad hoc approaches to missing data are generally not appropri8.1.2 Effect of Private School Attendance on Mathematate for estimating the ITT or CACE estimands when the comics and Reading. We also examine the effect of offering the
pliance principal strata have differential response (i.e., outcome
scholarship when focusing only on the compliers (the CACE).
missing-data) behaviors. To evaluate this here, we simulated the
The corresponding estimand for individual i is defined as posterior distributions of

E(Yi(1) - Yi(0) I Wf, Ci = c, 0).

p(Ri(z) I Ci = t, Wp, 0), z = 0, 1. (1)

To draw from the distributions of the estimands in (1), we used
This analysis defines the treatment as private school attendance (Sec. 6.3). The simulated posterior distribution ofstep
the1 from Section 8.1.1 and then, for z = 0, 1 for each subject
CACE is summarized in Table 6. A draw from this distribu-

calculated p(Ri(z) I Wp, Xobs, Rxi, Ci, 0). We then averaged

these values over subjects within subclasses defined by the diftion is obtained using steps 1-3 described in the Section 8.1.1
ferent combinations of WP and Ci.
for the ITT estimand, with the exception that at step 3 the avFor each draw (across individuals) from the distribution in (1)
eraging is restricted to the subjects whose current draw of Ci is
we calculate the odds ratios (a) between compliers attending
"complier."
public schools and never takers, (b) between compliers attendThe effects of private school attendance follow a pattern
ing private schools and always takers, and (c) between comsimilar to that of the ITT effects, but the posterior means are
pliers attending private schools and compliers attending public
slightly bigger in absolute value than ITT. The intervals have
also grown, reflecting that these effects are for only subgroups
of all children, the "compliers," in each cell. As a result, the associated uncertainty for some of these effects (e.g., for fourth-

graders applying from high-applicant schools) is large.

8.2 Compliance Principal Strata
and Missing Outcomes

schools. The results (omitted) showed that response was in-

creasing in the following order: never takers, compliers attending public schools, compliers attending private schools, and
always takers. These results confirm that the compliance principal stratum is an important factor in response both alone and
in interaction with assignment.
9. MODEL BUILDING AND CHECKING

Table 7 summarizes the posterior distribution of the esti-

This model was built through a process of fitting and ch

mands of the probability of being in stratum C as a function

ing a succession of models. Of note in this model are the fo

of an applicant's school and grade, p(Ci = t I WP, 0). To draw

ing features: a censored normal model that accommodate

Table 7. Proportions of Compliance Principal Strata Across Grade and Applicant's School

Grade at Applicant's school: Low Applicant's school: High
application Never taker Compiler Always taker Never taker Compiler Always taker

1
2
3
4

24.5(2.9)
20.5(2.7)
24.5(3.2)
18.4(3.3)

67.1(3.8) 8.4(2.4) 25.0(5.0)
69.4(3.7) 10.1(2.5) 25.3(5.1)
65.9(4.0) 9.6(2.5) 28.8(5.6)
72.8(4.6) 8.8(3.0) 27.0(5.5)

69.3(6.1) 5.7(3.3)

67.2(6.2) 7.5(3.4)
64.1(6.7) 7.1(3.5)
66.7(6.7) 6.3(3.6)

NOTE: Plain numbers are means, and parentheses are standard deviations of the posterior distribution o

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

308 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 2003

Table 8. Posterior Predictive Checks: p Values

pile-up of Os in the outcomes, incorporation of heteroscedast

ity, and a multivariate model to accommodate
both
outcom
Signal Noise Signal
to Noise
simultaneously. It is reassuring
from
the
perspective
Math
.34
.79
.32 of mod

Read
.40
.39
robustness that the results from
the last
few .88
models
fit, includ

ing those in the conference proceedings report of Barnard et
(2002), are consistent with the results from this final model.

The

9.1 Convergence Checks choose

posterior

here are functions of

Because posterior distributions were simulated from
Arep y rep : I(Ryep )I(Yrep #O)I(Cep c)I(Zi = z)= 1
Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm (App. A), it is impo

tant to assess its convergence. To do this, we ran three chain

for the
measures
are functions of each
data Yrpf, Ry
ipp and Ciep we s
from different starting values.
To
initiate
chain,
from
a replicated
study that
and
any unknown compliance stratum equal to a Bernoulli draw

with probabilities obtained from
of the prob
Ap, udymoment
{ Yip : I(Ryip = 1)I(Yip #estimates
O)I(Ci = c)I(Zi = z) = 1}

abilities of being a complier
observed
for the given
measures that are functions
of this study's data. Hereattendance a
randomization data (D, Z) alone. Using the initialized compli
Ryrep is defined so that it equals 1 if Yrep is observed and 0 othance strata for each chain, parameters
were
to valu
erwise and p equals 1 for math outcomes
and 2 forinitialized
reading out-

based on generalized linear model
estimates
of
model com
comes. The discrepancy
measures, "rep" and "study",
that the
we

ponents.
Each chain was run for 15,000 iterations. At 5,000 iterations,

and based on the three chains for each model, we calculated
the potential scale-reduction statistic (Gelman and Rubin 1992)
for the 250 estimands (parameters and functions of parameters)

that serve as building blocks for all other estimands. The results suggested good mixing of the chains (with the maximum
potential scale reduction statistic across parameters 1.04) and
provided no evidence against convergence. Inference is based
on the remaining 30,000 iterations, combining the three chains.
9.2 Model Checks

used for each outcome (p = 1, 2) were (a) the absolute value of
the difference between the mean of A p, 1 and the mean of Ap, 0

("signal"), (b) the standard error based on a simple two-sample
comparison for this difference ("noise"), and (c) the ratio of (a)
to (b) ("signal to noise"). Although these measures are not treatment effects, we chose them here to assess whether the model
can preserve broad features of signal, noise, and signal-to-noise
ratio in the continuous part of the compliers' outcome distribu-

tions, which we think can be very influential in estimating the
treatment effects of Section 8. More preferable measures might
have been the posterior mean and standard deviation for the ac-

tual estimands in Section 8 for each replicated dataset, but this

would have required
a prohibitive amount of computer memWe evaluate the influence of the model presented in Section
7
ory
because
of
the
nested
structure of that algorithm. In settings
with six posterior predictive checks, three checks for each of the
such as these, additional future work on choices of discrepancy
two outcomes. A posterior predictive check generally involves
measures
(a) choosing a discrepancy measure, that is, a function
of ob-is of interest.
PPPVs
served data and possibly of missing data and the parameter
vec-for the discrepancy measures that we chose were caltor 0; and (b) computing a posterior predictive p value culated
(PPPV),as the percentage of draws in which the replicated discrepancy measures exceeded the value of the study's discrepwhich is the probability over the posterior predictive distribuancy measure.
Extreme values (close to 0 or 1) of a PPPV would
tion of the missing data and 0 that the discrepancy measure
in

indicatebe
a failure of the prior distribution and likelihood to replia new study drawn with the same 0 as in our study would
cate 1996;
the corresponding measure of location, dispersion, or their
as or more extreme than in our study (Rubin 1984; Meng
relative magnitude and would indicate an undesirable influence
Gelman, Meng, and Stern 1996).

the model in estimation of our estimands. Results from these
Posterior predictive checks in general, and PPPVs in of
particchecks, displayed in Table 8, provide no special evidence for
ular, demonstrate whether the model can adequately preserve

such influences of the model.

features of the data reflected in the discrepancy measure, where

the model here includes the prior distribution as well as the like-

10. DISCUSSION

lihood (Meng 1996). As a result, properties of PPPVs are not
exactly the same as properties of classical p values under
Infrethis article we have defined the framework for
quency evaluations conditional on the unknown 8, just pal
as they
stratification in broken randomized experiments to
are not exactly the same for frequency evaluations over
both noncompliance, missing covariate information,
modate
levels of uncertainty, that is, the drawing of 8 from the prior
dis- data, and multivariate outcomes. We make ex
outcome
tribution and the drawing of data from the likelihood set
given
of 8.
structural assumptions that can identify the causal
For example, over frequency evaluations of the latterof
type,
a
interest,
and we also provide a parametric model th
PPPV is stochastically less variable than but has the same
mean for practical implementation of the framework
propriate
as the uniform distribution and so tends to be more conservative
tings such as ours.
than a classical p value, although the reverse can be true over Results from our model in the school choice study
frequency evaluations of the first type (Meng 1996). (For more
indicate strong treatment effects for most of the subgro
details on the interpretation and properties of the PPPVs, see
amined. But we do estimate positive effects (on the or
also Rubin 1984 and Gelman et al. 1996.)
percentile points for ITT and 5 percentile points for the

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Barnard et al.: Principal Stratification Approach to Broken Randomized Experiments 309

attendance) on math scores overall for children
who
applied
to has greater potential benefit for chilschool
voucher
program
dren in lower-scoring
the program from low-applicant schools, particularly
for firstschools.

Our results also reveal differences in compliance and
graders. Also, the effects were larger for African-American
missing-data
pattern across groups. Differences in compliance
children than for the remaining children (App. B).
Posterior distributions for the CACE estimand,
which
mea- applying from low-applicant schools are
indicate
that children
generally
more
likely to comply with their treatment assignsures the effect of attendance in private school versus public

ment; thisITT
could
provide incentives for policy makers to target
school, are generally larger than the corresponding
effects
this Of
subgroup
of children. However, this group also exhibits
but are also associated with greater uncertainty.
importance,
higher
levels
of always takers, indicating that parents of chilbecause of the missing outcomes, a model like
ours
is needed
for valid estimation even of the ITT effect.

dren attending these poorly performancing schools are more

to get their
child into a private school even in the abThe results from this randomized study are likely
not subject
to seof scholarship
availability. These considerations would of
lection bias in the way that nonrandomized sence
studies
in school

haveCACE,
to be balanced
with (and indeed might be dwarfed
choice have been. Nevertheless, although wecourse
use the
a
by)
concerns
about
equity.
Missing-data
patterns reveal that per
well-defined causal effect, to represent the effect of attendance
haps relatively greater effort is needed in future interventions
of private versus public schools, it is important to remember

of this nature to retain study participants who stay in public
that the CACE is defined on a subset of the study children
schools, particularly the public-school students who actually
(those who would have complied with either assignment) and
won
but did not use a scholarship.
that for the other children there is no information on such an
The approach presented here also has some limitations. First,
effect of attendance in this study. Therefore, as with any ranwe have presented principal stratification only on a binary condomized trial based on a subpopulation, external information,
trolled factor Z and a binary uncontrolled factor D, and it is

such as background variables, also must be used when gen-

of interest to develop principal stratification for more levels of
eralizing the CACE from compliers to other target groups of
such factors. Approaches that extend our framework in that dichildren. Also, it is possible that a broader implementation of
rection, including for time-dependent data, have been proposed
a voucher program can have a collective effect on the public
(e.g., Frangakis et al. 2002b).
schools if a large shift of the children who might use vouchAlso, the approach of explicitly conditioning on the patterns
ers were to have an impact on the quality of learning for chilof missing covariates that we adopted in the parametric comdren who would stay in public schools (a violation of the noponent of Section 7 is not as applicable when there are many
interference assumption). Because our study contains a small
patterns of missing covariates. In such cases, it would be more
fraction of participants relative to all school children, it cannot
appropriate to use models related to those of D'Agostino and
provide direct information about any such collective effect, andRubin (2000) and integrate them with principal stratification

additional external judgment would need to be used to address for noncompliance. Moreover, it would be also interesting to
investigate results for models fit to these data that allow deviaThe larger effects that we estimated for children applyingtions from the structural assumptions, such as weakened exclu-

this issue.

from schools with low versus high past scores are also not, sion restrictions (e.g., Hirano et al. 2000; Frangakis, Rubin, and
in principle, subject to the usual regression to the mean bias,Zhou 2002a), although to ensure robustness of such models, it
in contrast to a simple before-after comparison. This is be- would be important to first investigate and rely on additional
cause in our study both types of children are randomized to alternative assumptions that would be plausible.
be offered the scholarship or not, and both types in both treatAPPENDIX A: COMPUTATIONS
ment arms are evaluated at the same time after randomization.

Instead, the differential effect for children from schools with
Details are available at http://biosunOl.biostat.jhsph.edu/l
cfrangak/papers/sc.
different past scores is evidence supporting the claim that
the
Table B. 1. ITT Estimand

Grade at Applicant school: Low Applicant school: High
application Ethnicity Reading Math Reading Math

1 AA 2.8(-1.5,7.2) 6.7(3.0, 10.4) 1.8(-5.2, 8.4) 6.3(.

Other 1.7(_1.9, 5.4) 3.9(.5, 7.2) .8(-4.5, 6.1) 3.5(-1.2,8.

2 AA .8(-2.8,4.4) 2.4(-1.0o,5.8) -.3(-6.6, 6.0) 2.2(-3.8,8.0)

Other .2(-3.1,3.4) .5(-2.8, 3.7) -.9(-6.1,4.3) 0(-5.2,4.8)

3 AA 1.1(-3.0,5.2) 4.6(.3, 8.9) -.1(-6.7,6.4) 4.2(-2.5,10.6)
Other .3(-3.2,3.8) 2.0(-2.0,5.8) -.7(-5.8,4.4) 1.4(-3.9, 6.5)
4 AA 3.7(_1.2,8.7) 4.4(-.5,9.3) 2.4(-4.7,9.4) 3.8(-2.9,10.5)

Other 2.4(-1.7,6.7) 1.8(-2.6, 6.0) 1.4(-4.3,7.0) 1.1(-4.4, 6.4)
Overall AA 2.0(_.9, 4.8) 4.5(1.8,7.2) .8(-5.1,6.5) 4.2(-1.1,9.3)

Other 1.1(-1.4,3.6) 2.1(-.7,4.7) .1(-4.6,4.6) 1.6(-2.9, 5.8)
NOTE: Plain numbers are means, and parentheses are central 95% intervals of the posterior distribution of the effects on
percentile rank.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

310 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 2003
Table B.2. CACE Estimand

Grade at Applicant school: Low Applicant school: High
application Ethnicity Reading Math Reading Math

1 AA 3.8(-2.0, 9.6) 9.0(4.1,14.0) 2.3(-7.3, 10.9) 8.3(1.1,15.5)
Other 2.9(-3.1,8.8) 6.3(.8,11.8) 1.3(-8.0, 10.2) 5.9(-2.2, 13.9)
2 AA 1.1 (-3.6,5.7) 3. 1(-1.3,7.5) -.4(-9.0, 7.9) 2.9(-5.0,10.7)

Other .3(-4.9, 5.4) .8(-4.4, 5.9) -1.5(-10.5, 7.3) 0(-8.5, 8.5)
3 AA 1.5(-4.1,7.0) 6.3(.3,12.2) -.2(-9.1,8.5) 5.6(-3.2, 14.1)
Other .5(-5.4, 6.4) 3.5(-3.4, 10.2) -1.3(-10.5, 7.9) 2.7(-7.0,12.0)
4 AA 4.6(_1.6, 10.8) 5.5(_.7,11.6) 3.0(-6.0, 11.6) 4.8(-3.6,13.1)

Other 3.7(-2.6, 10.1) 2.8(-3.8, 9.3) 2.3(-7.4, 11.7) 2.0(_7.0, 11.0)

Overall AA 2.6(-1.2,6.3) 6.0(2.4,9.5) 1.0(-6.9, 8.4) 5.5(-1.5,12.2)
Other 1.7(-2.3,5.8) 3.3(-1.2,7.7) -.1(-8.1,7.9) 2.7(-5.0,10.3)

NOTE: Plain numbers are means, and parentheses are central 95% intervals of the posterior distribution of the effects on
percentile rank.

APPENDIX B: ETHNIC BREAKDOWN
The model of Section 7 can be used to estimate the effect of the

Cox, D. R. (1958), Planning of Experiments, New York: Wiley.

D'Agostino, Ralph B., J. and Rubin, D. B. (2000), "Estimating and Usin

Propensity Scores With Incomplete Data," Journal of the American Stat

program on finer strata that may be of interest. For example, totical
es- Association, 95, 749-759.
Education
Week (1998), Quality Counts '98: The Urban Challenge; Pub
timate effects stratified by ethnicity (AA for African-American),
we
Education in the 50 States, Bethesda, MD: Editorial Projects in Education.

obtain the posterior distribution of the causal effect of interest (ITT or

Frangakis, C. E., and Rubin, D. B. (1999), "Addressing Complicatio
CACE) using the same steps described in Section 8.1.1 or 8.1.2,of
but
Intention-to-Treat Analysis in the Combined Presence of All-or-No

allowing ethnicity to be part of the definition of WP. The results
for
Treatment-Noncompliance
and Subsequent Missing Outcomes," Biometrik
this stratification are reported in Table B.1 for the estimands of 86,
ITT365-380.

(2001), "Addressing the Idiosyncrasy in Estimating Survival Curve

and Table B.2 for the estimands of CACE.

Using Double-Sampling in the Presence of Self-Selected Right Censorin
The results follow similar patterns to those in Section 8. For each
(with discussion), Biometrics, 57, 333-353.

grade and applicant's school (low/high) combination, however, the
(2002), "Principal Stratification in Causal Inference," Biometrics, 58,
effects are more positive on average for the subgroup of African20-29.
American children. For both estimands, this leads to 95% intervals
Frangakis, C. E., Rubin, D. B., and Zhou, X. H. (2002a), "Clustered Encouragement Design With Individual Noncompliance: Bayesian Inference and Applithat are entirely above 0 for math scores for the following subgroups:

cation to Advance Directive Forms" (with discussion), Biostatistics, 3, 147-

African-American first- and third-graders and overall from low-

164.

applicant schools, African-American first-graders from high-applicant

Frangakis, C. E., Brookmeyer, R. S., Varadhan, R., Mahboobeh, S., Vlahov, D.,
schools, and non-African-American first-graders from low-applicant
and Strathdee, S. A. (2002b), "Methodology for Evaluating a Partially Conschools. All intervals for reading covered the null value. This suggests
trolled Longitudinal Treatment Using Principal Stratification, With Applica-

tion to a Needle Exchange Program," Technical Report NEP-06-02, Johns
that the positive effects reported on math scores in Section 8 for chil-

Hopkins University, Dept. of Biostatistics.
dren originating from low-applicant schools are primarily attributable
Fuller, B., and Elmore, R. F. (1996), Who Chooses? Who Loses? Culture, Into gains among the African-American children in this subgroup.

[Received October 2002. Revised October 2002.]

REFERENCES

stitutions, and the Unequal Effects of School Choice, New York: Teachers
College Press.
Gelfand, A. E., and Smith, A. F. M. (1990), "Sampling-Based Approaches to

Calculating Marginal Densities," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 85, 398-409.
Angrist, J. D., Imbens, G. W., and Rubin, D. B. (1996), "Identification of Causal
Gelman, A., Meng, X.-L., and Stern, H. (1996), "Posterior Predictive AssessEffects Using Instrumental Variables" (with discussion), Journal of the Amerment of Model Fitness via Realized Discrepancies (Disc: P760-807)," Statisican Statistical Association, 91, 444-472.
tica Sinica, 6, 733-760.

Barnard, J., Du, J., Hill, J. L., and Rubin, D. B. (1998), "A Broader Template
Gelman, A., and Rubin, D. B. (1992), "Inference from Iterative Simulation Usfor Analyzing Broken Randomized Experiments," Sociological Methods and
ing Multiple Sequences" (with discussion), Statistical Science, 7, 457-472.
Research, 27, 285-317.
Glynn, R. J., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. (1993), "Multiple Imputation in
Barnard, J., Frangakis, C., Hill, J. L., and Rubin, D. B. (2002), "School Choice
Mixture Models for Nonignorable Nonresponse With Follow-Ups," Journal
in NY City: A Bayesian Analysis of an Imperfect Randomized Experiment,"
of the American Statistical Association, 88, 984-993.
in Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, vol. V, eds. Gatsonis, C., Kass, R. E.,
Goldberger, A. S., and Cain, G. G. (1982), "The Causal Analysis of Cognitive
Carlin, B., Cariiguiry, A., Gelman, A., Verdinelli, I., West, M. New York:
Outcomes in the Coleman, Hoffer, and Kilgore Report," Sociology of EducaSpringer-Verlag, pp. 3-97.
tion, 55, 103-122.
Brandl, J. E. (1998), Money and Good Intentions Are Not Enough, or Why LibHaavelmo, T. (1943),
"The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous
eral Democrats Think States Need Both Competition and Community,
WashEquations," Econometrica, 11, 1-12.
ington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.
(1970), "Monte Carlo Sampling Methods Using Markov Chains
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching (1992),Hastings,
School W.
Choice:
and Their Applications," Biometrika, 57, 97-109.
A Special Report, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hill, J. L., Rubin,
D. B., and Thomas, N. (2000), "The Design of the New
Chubb, J. E., and Moe, T. M. (1990), Politics, Markets and America's
Schools,
York School Choice Scholarship Program Evaluation," in Donald Campbell's
Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.
Legacy,
ed. FranL. Bickman, Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Cobb, C. W. (1992), Responsive Schools, Renewed Communities,
San
Hirano, K., Imbens, G. W., Rubin, D. B., and Zhou, A. (2000), "Assessing the
cisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.
of an Influenza Vaccine in an Encouragement Design," Biostatistics, 1,
Coleman, J. S., Hoffer, T., and Kilgore, S. (1982), High SchoolEffect
Achievement,
New York: Basic Books.

69-88.

Holland, P. (1986), "Statistics and Causal Inference," Journal of the American
Cookson, P. W. (1994), School Choice: The Struggle for the Soul of American
Statistical Association, 81, 396, 945-970.
Education, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Coulson, A. J. (1999), Market Education: The Unknown History,Imbens,
BowlingG. W., and Angrist, J. D. (1994), "Identification and Estimation o
Green, OH: Social Philosophy & Policy Center.
Local Average Treatment Effects," Econometrica, 62, 467-476.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Muth6n,

Jo,

and

Brown:

Comment

311

Imbens, G. W., and Rubin,
Rubin, D. B. (1974), D.
"Estimating
B.
Causal(1997),
Effects of Treatments in
"Bayesi
Randomized
in Randomized Experiments
and Non-Randomized Studies,"
With
Journal of Educational
Noncomplia
Psychology, 66, 688701.
25, 305-327.
Levin, H. M. (1998), "Educational
Vouchers:
Eff
1 (1977), "Assignment to Treatment
Groups on the Basis of a Covariate,"
Journal of Policy Analysis
and
Management,
1
Journal of Educational
Statistics, 2,
1-26.
Little, R. J. A. (1993), "Pattern-Mixture
(1978a), "Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of RandomMod
Data," Journal of the ization,"
American
Statistical Ass
The Annals of Statistics, 6, 34-58.

(1996),
With

"Pattern-Mixture
for
Mult
- (1978b), "MultipleModels
Imputations in Sample Surveys:
A Phenomenologi-

Covariates,"

Biometrics,
52,
cal Bayesian Approach to Nonresponse
(C/R:98-111.
P29-34)," in Proceedings of the
Little, R. J. A., and Rubin,
D. Section,
B. American
(1987),
Statist
Survey Research Methods
Statistical Association.
pp. 2028.
New York: Wiley.
Meng, X. L. (1996), "Posterior
Predictive
p Va
(1979), "Using Multivariate Matched
Sampling and Regression Ad22, 1142-1160.
justment to Control Bias in Observational Studies," Journal of the American
Neal, D. (1997), "The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Statistical Association, 74, 318-328.
Achievement," Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 98-123.
(1980). Comments on "Randomization Analysis of Experimental
Neyman, J. (1923), "On the Application of Probablity Theory to Agricultural Data: The Fisher Randomization Test," Journal of the American Statistical
Experiments Essay on Principles. Section 9," translated in Statistical Science, Association, 75, 591-593.
5, 465-480.
(1984), "Bayesianly Justifiable and Relevant Frequency Calculations

Peterson, P E., and Hassel, B. C. (Eds.) (1998), Learning from School Choice, for the Applied Statistician," The Annals of Statistics, 12, 1151-1172.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.
(1990), "Comment: Neyman (1923) and Causal Inference in ExperiPeterson, P E., Myers, D. E., Howell, W. G., and Mayer, D. P. (1999), "The ments and Observational Studies," Statistical Science, 5, 472-480.
Effects of School Choice in New York City," in Earning and Learning; How The Coronary Drug Project Research Group (1980), "Influence of Adherence
Schools Matter, eds. S. E. Mayer and P. E. Peterson, Washington, DC: Brook- to Treatment and Response of Cholesterol on Mortality in the Coronary Drug
ings Institute Press.
Project," New England Journal of Medicine, 303, 1038-1041.
Robins, J. M., Greenland, S., and Hu, F.-C. (1999). "Estimation of the CausalTinbergen, J. (1930), "Determination and Interpretation of Supply Curves: An
Effect of a Time-Varying Exposure on the Marginal Mean of a Repeated Bi- Example," in The Foundations of Econometric Analysis, eds. D. Hendry and
nary Outcome" (with discussion), Journal of the American Statistical Associ- M. Morgan, Cambridge, U.K: Cambridge University Press.
ation, 94, 687-712.
Wilms, D. J. (1985), "Catholic School Effect on Academic Achievement: New
Rosenbaum, P. R., and Rubin, D. B. (1983), "The Central Role of the Propensity Evidence From the High School and Beyond Follow-Up Study," Sociology of
Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects," Biometrika, 70, 41-55.
Education, 58, 98-114.

Comment
Bengt MUTHEN, Booil Jo, and C. Hendricks BROWN

1. INTRODUCTION

see their application of cutting-edge Bayesian methods for deal-

ing with these complexities. In addition, we believe the methodThe article by Barnard, Frangakis, Hill, and Rubin (BFHR) is
ological issues and the results of the study have important imtimely in that the Department of Education is calling for more
plications
for the design and analysis of randomized trials in
randomized studies in educational program evaluation. (See the
education
and
for related policy decisions.
discussion of the "No Child Left Behind" initiative, in e.g.,

BFHR
Slavin 2002.) BFHR can serve as a valuable pedagogical
ex- provides results of the New York City school choice

experiment
based on 1-year achievement outcomes. With the
ample of a successful sophisticated statistical analysis of
a ranplanned
domized study. Our commentary is intended to provide
addi- addition of yearly follow-up data, growth models can
provide
tional pedagogical value to benefit the planning and analysis
ofan enhanced examination of causal impact. We discuss
how our
such growth modeling can be incorporated and provide a
future studies, drawing on experiences and research within
research group. [The Prevention Science Methodology caution
Group that applies to BFHR's use of only one posttest occasion. We also consider the sensitivity of the latent class ignora(PSMG; www.psmg.hsc.usfedu), co-PI's Brown and Muth6n,
has collaborated over the last 15 years with support from
bilitythe
assumption in combination with the assumption of comNational Institute of Mental Health and the National Institute
pound exclusion.
on Drug Abuse.]
2. LONGITUDINAL MODELING ISSUES
BFHR provides an exemplary analysis of the data from an
imperfect randomized trial that suffers from several compli-BFHR focuses on variation in treatment effect across com
cations simultaneously: noncompliance, missing data in outance classes. This part of the commentary considers varia
comes, and missing data in covariates. We are very pleased to
in treatment effect across a different type of class based on

notion that the private school treatment effect might very w

Bengt Muth6n is Professor and Booil Jo is postdoc, Graduatebe
School
ofdifferent for children with different achievement
quite
Education and Information Studies, University of California Los Angeles,
velopment. (Also of interest is potential variation in treatm
Los Angeles, CA-90095 (E-mail: bmuthen@ucla.edu). C. Hendricks Brown is

effects
across schools, with respect to both the public sch
Professor, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University
of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33620. The research of the first author was supported
by originated in and the private school the child w
the child
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism grant K02 AA 00230.

The research of the second and third authors was supported by National Institute on Drug Abuse and National Institute of Mental Health grant MH40859.
w 2003 American Statistical Association
Journal of the American Statistical Association
The authors thank Chen-Pin Wang for research assistance, Joyce Chappell for
graphical assistance, and the members of the Prevention Science Methodology
June 2003, Vol. 98, No. 462, Applications and Case Studi
DOI 10.1198/016214503000080
Group and the Fall ED299A class for helpful comments.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Wed, 20 Feb 2019 18:42:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

