EC08CH02-Haile

ANNUAL
REVIEWS

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Further

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

Click here to view this article's
online features:
• Download ﬁgures as PPT slides
• Navigate linked references
• Download citations
• Explore related articles
• Search keywords

Identification in Differentiated
Products Markets
Steven Berry and Philip Haile
Department of Economics and Cowles Foundation, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520; email: steven.berry@yale.edu, philip.haile@yale.edu

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016. 8:27–52

Keywords

First published online as a Review in Advance on
July 27, 2016

nonparametric identification, instrumental variables, discrete choice,
differentiated products oligopoly, demand and supply, firm conduct

The Annual Review of Economics is online at
economics.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-economics-080315-015050
c 2016 by Annual Reviews.
Copyright 
All rights reserved
JEL codes: C3, C5, C14

Abstract
Empirical models of differentiated products demand (and often supply) are
widely used in industrial organization and other fields of economics. We review some recent work studying identification in a broad class of such models.
This work shows that the parametric functional forms and distributional assumptions commonly used for estimation are not essential for identification.
Rather, identification relies primarily on the standard requirement that instruments be available for the endogenous variables—here, typically, prices
and quantities. We discuss the types of instruments that can suffice, as well as
how instrumental variables requirements can be relaxed by the availability of
individual-level data or through restrictions on preferences. We also review
new results on discrimination between alternative models of oligopoly competition. Together, these results reveal a strong nonparametric foundation
for a broad applied literature, provide practical guidance for applied work,
and may suggest new approaches to estimation and testing.

27

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

1. INTRODUCTION

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

Over the past 20 years, there has been an explosion of empirical work using models of differentiated
products demand and supply that build on that in Berry et al. (1995) (henceforth referred to as
the BLP model). Initially this work focused on traditional topics in industrial organization such
as market power, mergers, or the introduction of new goods. But as Table 1 suggests, these
models are being applied to an increasingly broad range of markets and questions in economics.
A quantitative understanding of demand or supply is essential to answering many positive and
normative questions in a wide range of markets, and most markets involve differentiated goods.
Empirical models following Berry et al. (1995) are particularly attractive for such applications
because they incorporate both rich heterogeneity in consumer preferences and product-level
unobservables. The former is essential for accurately capturing consumer substitution patterns
(own- and cross-price demand elasticities); the latter make explicit the source of the endogeneity
problems that we know arise in even the most elementary supply and demand settings.
Until recently, however, identification of BLP-type models was not well understood. One often
encountered informal speculation—either that the models were identified only through functional
form restrictions or that certain model parameters were identified by certain moments of the data.
But there was no formal analysis applicable to this class of models. In this review, we discuss some
recent work on this topic, focusing primarily on results presented in Berry et al. (2013) and Berry &
Haile (2014, 2016).1 This work considers nonparametric generalizations of the BLP model
and provides sufficient conditions for identification of demand, identification of firms’ marginal
costs and cost functions, and discrimination between alternative models of firm behavior.

Table 1

Example markets and topics

Topic

Example papers

Transportation demand

McFadden et al. 1977

Market power

Berry et al. 1995, Nevo 2001

Mergers

Nevo 2000, Capps et al. 2003, Fan 2013

Welfare from new goods

Petrin 2002, Eizenberg 2014

Network effects

Rysman 2004, Nair et al. 2004

Product promotions

Chintagunta & Honoré 1996, Allenby & Rossi 1999

Environmental policy

Goldberg 1998

Vertical contracting

Villas-Boas 2007, Ho 2009

Equilibrium product quality

Fan 2013

Media bias

Gentzkow & Shapiro 2010

Asymmetric information and insurance

Cardon & Hendel 2001, Lustig 2010, Bundorf et al.
2012

Trade policy

Goldberg 1995, Berry et al. 1999, Goldberg &
Verboven 2001

Residential sorting

Bayer et al. 2007

Voting

Gordon & Hartmann 2013

School choice

Hastings et al. 2010, Neilson 2013

1
We also make some use of a recent literature on the identification of simultaneous equations models, as represented by
Matzkin (2008, 2015) and Berry & Haile (2015).

28

Berry

·

Haile

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Broadly speaking, these papers show that when it comes to identification, there is nothing
special about BLP-type models. Even in a fully nonparametric specification, the primary requirement for identification is the availability of instruments providing sufficient exogenous variation
in prices and quantities. In addition, there are many sources of variation that can enable discrimination between alternative models of firm conduct.
We view these results as important for several reasons. First, they provide a strong nonparametric foundation for a large and growing empirical literature. They demonstrate that functional
forms and distributional assumptions commonly used for approximation in finite samples are not
required for identification; rather, standard instrumental variables conditions suffice. Second, the
results point to the possibility of new estimation approaches, including nonparametric estimators,
as well as new tests of firm behavior. Finally, the results yield important practical guidance for
applied researchers. They clarify which types of instruments allow identification of the most general models and point to trade-offs among the flexibility of the model (e.g., between alternative
separability restrictions), the types of data available (e.g., market level versus individual level), and
the demands on instrumental variables.

1.1. A Starting Point: The BLP Demand Model
On the demand side, Berry et al. (1995) build on classic models of demand with endogenous
prices and on the rich literature discussing discrete choice models of demand (as in McFadden
1981), as well as on a few earlier pioneering empirical works on differentiated products markets
in equilibrium, especially Bresnahan (1981, 1987). One variation of this model (see Berry et al.
1999) posits that consumer i’s conditional indirect utility for good j in market t can be written as
vi j t = x j t βit − αit p j t + ξ j t + i j t .

(1)

Here the vector x j t represents observed exogenous product characteristics, ξ j t is an unobserved
product/market characteristic, and p j t is the endogenous characteristic price.2
In addition to an independent and identically distributed idiosyncratic product/consumer
match value i j t , there are two types of unobservables in Equation 1, both essential. One is the
vector (βit , αit ) of random coefficients on x j t and p j t . These random coefficients allow heterogeneity in preferences that can explain why consumers tend to substitute among similar products
[those close in (xt , p t )-space] when prices or other attributes of the choice set change. The second
is the product-/market-level unobservable ξ j t . The presence of these demand shocks not only
is realistic (typically we do not observe all relevant attributes of a product or market), but also
generates the familiar problem of price endogeneity. That is, the price of a good in a given market
will typically be correlated with the latent demand shocks (those associated with all goods) in that
market. Such correlation is implied, for example, by standard oligopoly models when firms know
the realizations of these shocks or, more generally, the relevant elasticities of the demand system.
It is this combination of rich consumer heterogeneity through latent taste shocks and endogeneity
through explicitly modeled product-/market-specific demand shocks that distinguishes the BLP
framework, and upon which the nonparametric models of Berry & Haile (2014, 2016) build.
The parametric BLP model already raises a number of difficult questions about identification.
One is how to handle the problem of price endogeneity. Instrumental variables will typically be
needed. Classic instruments for prices are exogenous cost shifters. Berry et al. (1995) made limited
2
For simplicity, we discuss the usual case in which price is the (only) endogenous product attribute. The arguments extend
to the case of other endogenous attributes, although when there is more than one endogenous characteristic per good, the
number of instruments required will be greater.

www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

29

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

use of cost shifters, combining these with instruments (characteristics of competing products—
the so-called “BLP instruments”) that economic theory tells us will shift equilibrium markups (in
addition to shifting market shares conditional on prices). Following Hausman (1996), Nevo (2001)
emphasized proxies for cost shifters (prices of the same good in other markets), whereas Berry
et al. (1999) added a range of cost shifters such as exchange rates. A more subtle point involves
identification of the “substitution parameters”—those governing the distribution of the random
coefficients. Intuition suggests that these parameters would be identified by exogenous changes in
choice sets (e.g., additions and removals of choices), as these would directly reveal the extent to
which consumers tend to substitute to similar goods. But such exogenous variation often is limited
if present at all. So can more continuous changes in choice sets—say, variation in the prices or
qualities of a fixed set of goods—do the job? Are the kinds of instruments used in practice sufficient
to identify these parameters without relying on distributional assumptions? What about models
with less parametric structure on consumer preferences? Can anything be gained by combining
the supply and demand model in a single system (see, e.g., Bresnahan 1987, Berry et al. 1995)?
Do consumer-level demand data help with identification? Although many empirical papers have
followed the modeling approach of Berry et al. (1995), these identification questions remained
without formal answers for many years.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

1.2. Related Literatures
Above we mention some key papers that motivate the work we review, but we pause here to
highlight other related work. A huge literature on applied discrete choice demand goes back
at least to McFadden (1974), with many later contributions. On the supply side, the idea of
estimating marginal costs by using first-order conditions for imperfectly competitive firms goes
back to Rosse (1970), continues through the New Empirical Industrial Organization literature
of the 1980s (see Bresnahan 1989), and has become a standard tool of the empirical industrial
organization (and auctions) literatures. The literature on discriminating between different modes
of oligopoly competition dates back at least to Bresnahan (1982) and Lau (1982).
There is an extensive prior literature on the identification of semi-/nonparametric discrete
choice models. Perhaps surprisingly, that literature does not cover models with the key features
(rich consumer heterogeneity and endogeneity through product-level unobservables) of the BLP
framework. Several papers allow rich taste heterogeneity, but without endogeneity. Examples
include Ichimura & Thompson (1998) and Briesch et al. (2010). Other papers on the nonparametric
identification of discrete choice models without endogeneity include Manski (1985, 1987, 1988),
Matzkin (1992, 1993), and Magnac & Maurin (2007). Another literature (e.g., Blundell & Powell
2004) considers control function techniques for dealing with endogeneity. In general, however,
control function techniques apply to triangular (or recursive) systems of equations, not to fully
simultaneous systems (see, e.g., Berry & Haile 2014, 2015, and especially Blundell & Matzkin
2014). Consequently, except under strong functional form restrictions, such approaches are not
applicable to models of supply and demand.
Yet another set of papers considers endogeneity involving correlation between a choice characteristic and unobservables at the individual (e.g., consumer or worker) level. Lewbel (2000), for
example, considers a conditional indirect utility function of the form vi j = xi j β + i j , where the
observables xi j can alter the distribution F (·|xi j ) of i j . However, typical quantities of interest in
a differentiated products context (e.g., demand elasticities) involve counterfactuals that hold fixed
the market-/product-level unobservables and consumer tastes while letting the distribution of utilities change with the value of an observed variable (e.g., a price). Defining such quantities requires
a different framework. Other papers that consider endogeneity in discrete choice models, but in

30

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

a framework different from the differentiated products framework we discuss, include Honoré
& Lewbel (2002), Hong & Tamer (2003), Altonji & Matzkin (2005), Lewbel (2006), Hoderlein
(2009), Petrin & Gandhi (2011), and Fox & Gandhi (2011, 2016).

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

1.3. The Path Ahead
Looking ahead to the remainder of the article, we first review some familiar parametric demand
models to motivate key ideas behind our approach. We then discuss identification of demand when
one has only market-level data, as in the original Berry et al. (1995) paper. This is followed by a
discussion of the gains that can be obtained from observing individual-level (micro) data. Micro
data does not eliminate the endogeneity problem, but it can substantially reduce the number of
instruments required for identification. We then turn to identification of the supply side, including
results that demonstrate constructive joint identification of marginal costs and demand, as well as
results on discrimination between alternative static oligopoly models.

2. INSIGHTS FROM PARAMETRIC MODELS
Our approach to the nonparametric identification problem builds on insights from familiar parametric models. Consider a standard multinomial logit model (incorporating product-specific unobservables) in which consumer i’s conditional indirect utility from product j > 0 in market t is
vi j t = x j t β − αp j t + ξ j t + i j t ,

(2)

and the conditional indirect utility from the outside good (good 0) is vi0t = i0t . Let
γ j t = x j t β − αp j t + ξ j t .
Choice probabilities (or market shares) are then given by the well-known formula
s jt =

1+

e γ jt

k

e γkt

.

(3)

Each share depends on the entire vector (γ1t , . . . , γJt ). The share of good j is strictly increasing
in γJt and strictly decreasing in γkt for k = j . Thus, the “mean utility” γJt can be interpreted as
a quality index—one with observed and unobserved components.
As is well known, the relationship in Equation 3 can be inverted to express each index as a
function of the market share vector: γJt = ln(sJt ) − ln(s0t ). Remembering the definition of the
index γJt , we have
ln(s j t ) − ln(s0t ) = x j t β − αp Jt + ξJt .
As noted in Berry (1994), this now looks like a regression model with an endogenous covariate
p j t . To identify the model parameters (α, β), one needs an excluded instrument for price. To look
(1)
(2)
(1)
even more like what we do later, partition x j t as (x j t , x j t ) where x j t is a scalar. Then condition
(2)

on x j t and rewrite the previous expression as
(1)

x j t + ξ̃ j t =

 α
1
ln(s j t ) − ln(s0t ) + p j t ,
β
β

(4)

with ξ̃ j t = ξ j t /β. The right-hand side of this expression is a tightly parameterized function of
(1)
shares and prices. The left-hand side is just a linear index of x j t and the (rescaled) unobserved
characteristic.
More flexible models yield this same general form, only with less restrictive functions of shares
and prices on the right-hand side. For example, if we follow the same steps for the two-level nested
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

31

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

logit model, one can obtain (see Berry 1994) the equation
ln(s j t ) − ln(s0t ) = x j t β − αp j t + (1 − λ) ln(s j |g,t ) + ξ j t ,
where s j |g,t denotes the share of good j within its nest (or group) g. This again looks like a
regression model, but now identification requires instruments not only for p j t but also for the
endogenous share s j |g,t . Loosely, the need for this extra instrument reflects the new parameter λ,
which (compared to the multinomial logit) gives more flexibility to the patterns of substitution
(2)
permitted by the model. As before, we can fix x j t and rewrite the previous equation as
(1)

x j t + ξ̃ j t =

 α
1
ln(s j t ) − ln(s0t ) − (1 − λ) ln(s j/g,t ) + p j t ,
β
β

(5)

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

yielding a linear index on the left and a more flexible function of price and shares on the right.
Finally, consider the BLP model and assume that there is one element of the product charac(1)
teristic vector, x j t , that does not have a random coefficient. Then the model can once again be
(1)

(1)

rewritten with a nonrandom linear index x j t β̄0 + ξ j t for each product. Although there is no longer
a closed form for the inverse of the system of market shares, Berry et al. (1995) show that such an
inverse exists (and provide a computational algorithm). To make a connection to Equations 4 and
5, we can write this inverse as


1
(1)
(2)
(6)
x j t + ξ̃ j t = (1) δ̃ j st , p t , xt , θ ,
β̄0
(1)

where ξ̃ j t = ξ j t /β̄0 . Compared to Equations 4 and 5, the right-hand side of Equation 6 is
now a more complicated function of prices and market shares, all of which are endogenous. For
identification of the parameters in this equation, one needs excluded instruments for prices and,
in addition, excluded instruments providing sufficient independent variation in the shares st . In
the literature, the latter set of instruments is often described loosely as instruments identifying
the “nonlinear parameters” of the model—those determining how much the random coefficients
affect substitution patterns.
Our discussion of each of these examples featured three key components: (a) an index of each
good’s unobserved characteristic and an observed characteristic, (b) an inversion mapping observed
market shares to each index, and (c) a set of instrumental variables for the prices and market shares
appearing in the inverse function. Our approach to nonparametric identification will make use of
this same sequence of features.

3. IDENTIFICATION OF DEMAND FROM MARKET-LEVEL DATA
3.1. Demand Model
We begin by sketching the discrete choice demand model of Berry & Haile (2014). In each market
t, there is a continuum of consumers. In practice, markets are typically defined by time or geography, although one can use observed consumer characteristics to define markets more narrowly.
Formally, a market is defined by {Jt , χt }, where Jt denotes the number of inside goods available.
The outside good—the option to purchase none of the modeled goods—is always available as well
and indexed as good 0. The matrix χt describes all product and market characteristics (observed
and unobserved).3 We henceforth condition on the number of goods available, setting Jt = J for
all t. In each market, each consumer i chooses one good j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , J}.
3

32

We use the terms good, product, and choice interchangeably.

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Following the Berry et al. (1995) notation above, x j t ∈ R K is a vector of exogenous observables
associated with good j or market t, p j t ∈ R is an endogenous observable (price), and ξ j t ∈ R
is a market-/choice-specific unobservable. We let xt = (x1t , . . . , xJt ), p t = ( p 1t , . . . , p Jt ), and
ξt = (ξ1t , . . . , ξJt ). Thus, the characteristics of the market are χt = (xt , p t , ξt ) .
Demand is derived from a random utility model. Each consumer i in market t has preferences
characterized by a vector of conditional indirect utilities (henceforth referred to as utilities) for
the available goods:

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

vi0t , vi1t, . . . , viJt .
Without loss, the utility vi0t of the outside good is normalized to zero for each consumer. From the
econometrician’s perspective, for each consumer i, (vi1t, . . . , viJt ) is a vector of random variables
drawn from a joint distribution Fv (·|χt ).
Thus far, the model is extremely general, placing no restriction on how Fv (·|χt ) depends on
χt . Implicitly, we have imposed one significant assumption on the demand model by restricting
the j t-level unobservable ξ j t to be a scalar. This is standard in practice and appears difficult to
relax without data on multiple decisions (e.g., panel data, ranked data, or repeated choice data)
or distinct submarkets (subpopulations of consumers) assumed to share the same demand shocks
(see, e.g., Athey & Imbens 2007).
We further restrict the model with an index structure. In particular, we partition the exogenous
(1)
(2)
(1)
observed characteristics into two parts, x j t = (x j t , x j t ), with x j t ∈ R. For each good j , we then
define an index


(1)
(7)
δ jt = δ j xjt , ξ jt
for some (possibly unknown) function δ j that is strictly increasing in ξ j t . We require that the
(1)
joint distribution Fv (·|χt ) depend on x j t and ξ j t only through the index δ j t . That is, letting
δt = {δ1t , . . . , δJt }, we require
(2)

Fv (·|χt ) = Fv (·|δt , xt , p t ).

(8)
(2)
(δt , xt ,

This is a “weak separability” condition. It places no restriction on how
p t ) together alter
the joint distribution of utilities but requires, e.g., that the marginal rate of substitution between
(1)
(2)
x j t and ξ j t be invariant to (xt , p t ). The index restriction is satisfied in all of our parametric
examples. However, whereas those examples specified utilities that are separable in the index, this
is not required by Equation 8.
For the results of this section, we also assume that each δ j is linear:
(1)

δ jt = xjt β j + ξ jt,

(9)

with each β j normalized to 1 without loss (this merely defines the units of ξ j t ). Berry & Haile (2014)
discuss identification with a nonseparable index function, and we discuss the case of a nonlinear
(2)
but separable index function below. Henceforth, we condition on xt , suppress it in the notation
(1)
when possible, and let x j t denote x j t . The model is then completely general in its treatment of
(2)

xt .
As usual, market-level demand is derived from the conditional (on χt ) distribution of random
utilities. Each consumer chooses the product giving the highest utility, yielding choice probabilities
(market shares)


(10)
s j t = σ j (χt ) = σ j (δt , p t ) = Pr arg max vi j t = j |δt , p t , j = 1, . . . , J.
j ∈J

Let st denote the vector of market shares (s1t , . . . , sJt ).
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

33

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

The functions σ j fully characterize the demand system. With market-level data, we observe
(st , xt , p t ). If we also observed each ξ j t , we would directly observe the demand functions (σ1 , . . . , σJ );
i.e., identification of demand would be trivial. Thus, the main challenge to nonparametric identification of demand is endogeneity arising through the unobservables ξ j t . In fact, the challenge
here is more complex than in many familiar economic settings because each of the endogenous
variables p j t and s j t (price and quantity) depends on all J demand shocks (ξ1t , . . . , ξJt ). Standard
instrumental variables and control function approaches cannot be applied here because prices
and quantities are determined in a fully simultaneous system. Our approach to overcoming these
challenges builds on the index-inverse-instruments intuition developed above for the parametric
examples. We have already described the index restriction. We next discuss the inversion of market
shares.

3.2. Inversion
The goal of the inversion step is to show that, given any vector of prices and nonzero market
shares, there is a unique vector of indices δt that can rationalize this observation with the demand
system (Equation 10). Berry et al. (2013) demonstrate this invertibility under a condition they call
“connected substitutes.” This condition has two parts. The first is that all goods are weak gross
substitutes with respect to the indices; i.e., for k = j , σk (δt , p t ) is weakly decreasing in δ j t for all
(δt , p t ) ∈ R2J . This is little more than a monotonicity assumption implying that δ j t is “good” (e.g.,
an index of product quality) at least on average across consumers. A sufficient condition is that,
as in the parametric examples, higher values of δ j t raise the utility of good j without affecting the
utilities of other goods.
The second part of the Berry et al. (2013) connected substitutes condition is “connected strict
substitution.” This condition requires that, starting from any inside good, there be a chain of
substitution leading to the outside good. For example, in a multinomial logit model (or any
discrete choice model in which additive shocks to utilities have full support), all goods strictly
substitute directly to the outside good (all else equal, an increase in the quality of good j causes
the market share of the outside good to fall), so the condition is satisfied. In a model of pure vertical
differentiation (e.g., Mussa & Rosen 1978, Bresnahan 1981), each good strictly substitutes only
with its immediate neighbors in the quality hierarchy. But starting from any good j > 0, there
will be a path from one neighbor to the next that eventually links j to the outside good. Thus, in
the vertical model, the connected strict substitution requirement is again satisfied.
Formally, a good j substitutes to good k at (δt , p t ) if σk (δt , p t ) is strictly decreasing in δ j t . We
represent the pattern of strict substitution with a matrix (δt , p t ) that has entries
j +1,k+1

=

1{good j substitutes to good k at x}
0

j >0
j = 0.

The second part of the connected substitutes condition is that for all (δt , p t ) in their support, the
directed graph of (δt , p t ) has, from every node k = 0, a directed path to node 0.4
Berry et al. (2013) discuss a range of examples and point out that when δ j t is a quality index, it
is hard to violate the connected substitutes condition in a discrete choice setting. Weak substitutes
is a direct implication of weak monotonicity in a discrete choice model, and connected strict

4
One can of course define the connected substitutes condition in terms of substitution in response to changes in a product
characteristic other than the index—for example, price.

34

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

substitution then requires only that there be no strict subset of the goods that substitute only
among themselves. That is to say, all the goods must belong in one demand system.
Given connected substitutes, Berry et al. (2013) prove the existence of the inverse market share
function. That is, for all j , there is a function σ j−1 such that

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

δ j t = σ j−1 (st , p t )

(11)

for all (st , p t ) in their support.
We do not discuss the proof here but point out that this result offers an alternative to the classic
invertibility results of Gale & Nikaido (1965) or Palais (1959), which can be difficult to apply to
demand systems. Because Berry et al.’s (2013) result applies outside the discrete choice setting
considered here, an interesting question is whether it can be used as the starting point for studying
identification of demand in other settings as well.
Unlike the inversion results for the parametric examples, the invertibility result of Berry et al.
(2013) provides no characterization or computational algorithm for the inverse. Nonetheless,
having established that the inverse exists, we can move on to its identification using instrumental
variables. Note that once the inverse is known, so is the value of each index δ j t and, therefore, each
demand shock ξ j t . Thus, once we demonstrate identification of the inverse, it is as if there were
no unobservables—a situation in which (as discussed above) identification of the demand system
is trivial.

3.3. Instruments: Identifying the Inverse Demand System
The final step of the argument involves using instrumental variables to identify the inverse market
share functions. Recalling that
δi j = x j t + ξ j t ,
we can rewrite Equation 11 as
x j t = σ j−1 (st , p t ) − ξ j t .

(12)

This equation bears close resemblance to the standard nonparametric regression model studied
by Newey & Powell (2003). They consider identification of the model
ỹi =

(x̃i ) + i ,

(13)

using instrumental variables wi that satisfy a standard exclusion restriction that E [i |wi ] = 0
almost surely (a.s.). They show that the analog of the classic rank condition for identification of a
linear regression model is a standard completeness condition (Lehmann & Scheffe 1950, 1955),
namely that if B(x̃i ) is a function with finite expectation satisfying E [B (x̃i ) |wi ] = 0 a.s., then
B (x̃i ) = 0 a.s. Similar to the classic rank condition, completeness requires that the instruments
induce “enough” variation in the endogenous variables.
Equations 12 and 13 are not quite equivalent. Whereas the endogenous variable ỹi appears
alone on the left-hand side in Equation 13, in Equation 12 all endogenous variables enter through
the unknown function σ j . Furthermore, in Equation 12 the exogenous observable x j t —an essential
instrument, as demonstrated below—is not excluded. Nonetheless, Berry & Haile (2014) show
that the proof used by Newey & Powell (2003) can be used to establish identification of σ j−1 (·)
under analogous exclusion and completeness conditions. In particular, let wt now denote a set
of observables and suppose that (a) E[ξ j t |xt , wt ] = 0 a.s., and (b) for all functions B (st , p t ) with
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

35

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

finite expectation,5 if E [B (st , p t ) |xt , wt ] = 0 a.s., then B (st , p t ) = 0 a.s. Then each of the inverse
functions σ j−1 (·) is identified. Given Equation 12, each unobserved product characteristic ξ j t is
then identified, and identification of the demand system in Equation 10 follows immediately.
We discuss the availability of instruments below. However, it is worth pausing to observe that
this result provides a reassuringly dull answer to the question of what ensures identification of
demand in a BLP-type model: instruments for the endogenous variables. Because the model involves discrete choice, rich consumer heterogeneity, and a simultaneous system (e.g., all prices
and quantities depend on all J demand shocks), the best possible hope is that identification would
be obtained under the same instrumental variables conditions needed for identification of a homogeneous regression model with a separable scalar error. This is what is shown by Berry & Haile
(2014).

3.4. Discussion
We pause here to discuss several important issues, including (a) our focus on the demand system
rather than a joint distribution of utilities, (b) the types of observables that can serve as the required
instrumental variables, (c) the important and interrelated roles of the BLP instruments and the
index restriction, and (d) the ways in which additional restrictions on preferences can weaken the
instrumental variables requirements.
3.4.1. Demand versus utility. The demand functions σ j are the main features of interest on
the consumer side of the model. These functions determine all demand counterfactuals (up to
extrapolation/interpolation, as usual). Demand is the input from the consumer model needed to
estimate marginal costs, to test models of supply, to simulate a merger, and so forth. However,
demand is not necessarily enough to identify changes in consumer welfare. As usual, valid notions
of aggregate consumer welfare changes can be obtained from market-level demand under an
additional assumption of quasilinearity. Changes in consumer welfare (consumer surplus) are
then identified whenever demand is.
Berry & Haile (2014) also show how to extend identification of demand to identification
of the joint distribution of random utilities, Fv (·|χt ) under standard quasilinearity and support
conditions. However, given identification of demand and consumer surplus, there is often little
gain from identifying a particular distribution of random utilities consistent with demand.
3.4.2. Instrumental variables. Although it is encouraging that essentially all one needs for identification is a suitable set of instruments, this leads to the important question of what kinds of
observables can play the role of these instruments in practice. The analysis above reveals several
insights. One important observation is that for the completeness condition above to hold, the instruments must have dimension no less than 2J—i.e., instruments for all 2J endogenous variables
(st , p t ) are needed. This should not be surprising given the discussion of the parametric examples:
Except in the most restrictive of these models, we required instruments not only for prices but
for some quantities (market shares) as well. Formally, this requirement reflects the fact that, in a
multigood setting, the quantity demanded of a given good depends on the endogenous prices of all
goods, as well as the demand shocks associated with all goods.6 Inverting the demand system is a

5

Other types of completeness assumptions (see, e.g., Andrews 2011) can also suffice.

6

Contrast this with a classical supply and demand model, in which the quantity demanded depends on only one endogenous
price and one demand shock.
36

Berry

·

Haile

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

valuable trick producing a system with only one structural error (demand shock) per equation (see
Equation 12). But, in general, the resulting inverted demand equations each depend on all prices
and quantities. Identification of these inverse demand functions requires independent exogenous
variation in each of these variables.
Excluded cost shifters (e.g., input prices) are the classic instruments for identifying demand.
Proxies for cost shifters or for marginal costs themselves (if these proxies are properly excluded
from demand) can of course substitute. Hausman (1996) proposes a particular type of proxy
for the marginal cost of good j in market t: the prices of good j in other markets t  (see also
Nevo 2000). Another type of candidate instrument is an excluded shifter of firm markups. One
possibility involves demographics of other markets falling in the same pricing zone (see, e.g.,
Gentzkow & Shapiro 2010, Fan 2013). The availability and suitability of these different types of
instruments vary across applications. Excluded cost shifters are sometimes available, either at the
firm or product level. Hausman instruments can always be constructed from a market-level data
set but have been controversial: In some applications, the exclusion restriction may be difficult to
defend, and in others the instruments may have little cross-market variation. Instruments based on
demographics of other markets require at least market-level demographic data and a supply-side
connection (like zonal pricing) between the price in one market and the demographics of another.
But even when one has suitable instruments in one or more of these classes, the analysis above
reveals something important: Such instruments cannot suffice on their own in the model above.
This is because costs and markups affect the endogenous variables (st , p t ) only through prices.
This point may become more clear by considering the identification problem when all price
variation is exogenous (independent of ξt ). With exogenous prices, p t can be treated as an element
(2)
of xt and held fixed for the purposes of studying identification. The inverted demand equations
then take the form (cf. Equation 12)
x j t = σ j−1 (st ) − ξ j t .

(14)

Each of these equations involves the J-dimensional endogenous variable st . Identification can still
be obtained following the argument above, but this requires instruments for st . Excluded shifters
of costs or markups cannot do the job because they only alter shares through prices (which are
fixed).
This raises the question of what remaining instruments, excluded from the inverse market share
function, can shift st in Equation 12 or 14. The exogenous product characteristics xt are the only
available instruments, and they are of the correct dimension. Thus, our result on the identification
of demand requires J-dimensional instruments wt affecting prices (costs or markups), plus the
product characteristics that enter the demand indices δ j t . Strictly speaking, we have described
sufficient conditions for identification; however, given the presence of 2J endogenous variables,
it seems unlikely that one could avoid the need for exogenous variation of dimension 2J without
additional data or structure.
Some additional intuition about the role of the instruments xt can obtained by relating the
derivatives of the market share function σ (δt , p t ) = (σ1 (δt , p t ), . . . , σJ (δt , p t )) to the derivatives of
the inverse mapping σ −1 (st , p t ) = (σ1−1 (st , p t ), . . . , σJ−1 (st , p t )). Holding prices fixed (with other
instruments for prices), by the implicit function theorem, the derivative matrix ( Jacobian) of σ
with respect to the indices is the inverse of the derivative matrix of σ −1 with respect to the shares.
Thus, identifying the effects of shares in the inverse demand system in Equation 12 is equivalent to
identifying the effects of the indices δt on market shares in Equation 10. The xt vector directly shifts
the indices δt , so it is not surprising that these are appropriate instruments for market shares in the
inverse demand function. Furthermore, without the index structure that links the effects of ξ j t to
the effects of x j t , it is not clear how one could quantify the effects that changes in unobservables
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

37

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

have on demand. With the linear index structure, this link is particularly clear: A unit increase in
ξ j t has the same effects as a unit increase in x j t .
This analysis also clears up some possible confusion about the excludability of the BLP instruments. On one hand, it natural to ask how (whether) demand shifters could be properly excluded
from demand. On the other hand, it is clear that characteristics of goods k = j are excluded from
the utility of good j , and the parametric examples suggest that perhaps this is enough. We can see
in the analysis above that it is the index restriction that makes the exogenous variables xt available
(2)
as instruments [rather than being fixed like xt ] and that yields a system of inverse demand equations in which each x j t appears in only one equation. Thus, both the index restriction and BLP
instruments are central to the identification result above.
Finally, we can see that the BLP instruments are not sufficient on their own in this model. They
provide the required independent variation in st , but something else must provide the independent
exogenous variation in p t (cf. Armstrong 2015).7 This requires additional instruments for costs
or markups. The importance of combining both types of variation has been recognized in much
of the applied literature. For example, Berry et al. (1995) utilize both the BLP instruments and
proxies for marginal cost, and Berry et al. (1999) add further cost instruments. The importance of
having both types of instruments, even in a parametric setting, is supported by recent simulations
by Reynaert & Verboven (2014). The results of Berry & Haile (2014) may explain why: Both types
of instruments appear to be essential, at least without additional data or structure.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

3.4.3. Functional form restrictions. We saw in the parametric examples that the instrumental
variables requirements were milder than those for the fully nonparametric case. In fact, the parametric structure not only reduced a completeness condition to a standard rank condition, but also
cut the number of instruments required. This suggests a potentially important role for functional
form restrictions in substituting for sources of exogenous variation. This may be a concern in
some applications in which one suspects that functional form, rather than exogenous variation,
is pinning down demand parameters. But this trade-off may be advantageous in other cases: It
is sometimes difficult to find J-dimensional cost shifters (or proxies) that can be excluded from
demand, and further exploration reveals that even fairly modest restrictions on the demand system
can yield substantial reductions in the instrumental variables requirements.
To illustrate one such possibility, consider a stronger form of the weak separability condition,
(1)
requiring now that price be included in the index δ j t along with x j t [i.e., x j t ] and ξ j t :
δ j t = x j t β − αp j t + ξ j t .

(15)

(2)

Recall that xt has been treated fully flexibly and that the indices δt enter demand through a fully
nonparametric nonseparable mapping σ . Thus, this more restrictive specification still substantially
generalizes versions of the BLP model in which, as often assumed in applied work, price and at
least one exogenous observable enter the utility function without random coefficients. Without
loss of generality, we can choose the units of ξ j t by setting α = 1. The equations of the inverse
demand system then have the form
x j t β − p j t + ξ j t = σ j−1 (st )
or
p j t = −σ j−1 (st ) + x j t β − ξ j t .
7
The vector xt typically will alter elasticities and therefore markups (prices). However, our formal argument relies on the
direct effect of xt on shares, holding prices fixed.

38

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

This takes the form of a classic inverse demand function with price on the left-hand side and
quantities (here, shares) on the right. In this case, because shares are the only endogenous variables
on the right, the BLP instruments x− j t can suffice alone: Instruments for costs or markups would
still be useful in practice but would not be necessary for identification.
There are many other possibilities for imposing functional form restrictions that reduce the
instrumental variables requirements. These include a variety of nonparametric restrictions such
as symmetry and various nesting structures that can often be motivated by economics or features
of the market being studied.

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

4. GAINS FROM MICRO DATA
Better data can also relax the instrumental variables requirements. Here we consider micro data
that match individual choices to consumer-/choice-specific observables
zit = (zi1t , . . . , ziJt ) ,
where each zi j t ∈ R.8 Often these consumer-/choice-specific variables will involve interactions
(1)
(2)
between consumer attributes and product attributes [xt or xt in the notation of the previous section]. For example, many applications have utilized interactions of consumer and choice locations
to create measures of distance specific to each consumer and product, e.g., to different modes
of transport (McFadden et al. 1977), different hospitals (Capps et al. 2003), different schools
(Hastings et al. 2010), or different retailers (Burda et al. 2015). Other examples of observables that
might play the role of zit include exposure to product-specific advertising (Ackerberg 2003), family
size × car size (Berry et al. 1995, Goldberg 1995), consumer-newspaper political match (Gentzkow
& Shapiro 2010), and household-neighborhood demographic match (Bayer & Timmins 2007).
As above, Berry & Haile (2016) start from an extremely flexible random utility model in which
(vi1t , . . . , viJt ) ∼ Fv (·|χit ) ,
where now [dropping the distinction between

(1)
xt

and

(16)

(2)
xt ]

χit = (zit , xt , p t , ξt ) .

(17)

Consumer utility maximization yields choice probabilities
σ j (χit ) = σ j (zit , xt , p t , ξt ) ,

j = 1, . . . , J.

(18)

Let σ (zit , xt , p t , ξt ) = (σ1 (zit , xt , p t , ξt ) , . . . , σJ (zit , xt , p t , ξt )).
Within a given market, (xt , p t , ξt ) are fixed, but choice probabilities vary with the value of zit .
Let Zt denote the support of zit in market t. For each ẑ ∈ Zt , we observe the conditional choice
probability vector st (ẑ) = (s1t (ẑ), . . . , sJt (ẑ)), where each
s j t (ẑ) = σ j (ẑ, xt , p t , ξt )
gives the market share of good j among ẑ-type consumers, given the true value of the vector
(xt , p t , ξt ) in market t. Let
St = st (Zt )

8
Other consumer-level observables can be accommodated in a fully flexible way by treating these as characteristics (elements
of xt ) of distinct markets. This would permit a different vector of unobservables ξt for consumers with different observable
characteristics. For example, an unobserved product characteristic viewed as desirable by one demographic group could be
viewed as undesirable by another.

www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

39

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

denote the set of all conditional choice probability vectors in market t generated by some ẑ ∈ Zt .
Of course, for every s ∈ St , there is at least one vector zt∗ (s ) ∈ Zt such that


(19)
st zt∗ (s ) = s .

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

The identification arguments in Berry & Haile (2016) rely heavily on the within-market variation in choice probabilities that results from variation in the consumer characteristics zit . Just
as in the case of market-level data, the primary challenge is uncovering the value of the latent
demand shocks ξ j t ; once the demand shocks are known, identification of demand is trivial. Berry
& Haile (2016) obtain identification using two alternative approaches (applied to slightly different
models), each proceeding in two steps. First, within-market variation in zit is used to construct,
for each j t combination, a scalar variable that is a function of prices and the scalar unobservable
ξ j t . Second, standard instrumental variables arguments are applied to obtain identification of this
function and, therefore, the value of each structural error ξ j t . Both approaches lead to results
allowing identification of demand with weaker instrumental variables requirements than those we
required without micro data.

4.1. Identification with a Common Choice Probability
The first approach utilizes an index restriction very similar to that used in the case of market-level
data and avoids the strongest requirements on the exogenous variation in choice probabilities
provided by instruments.
4.1.1. Index and inversion. Let
λi j t = g j (zi j t ) + ξ j t ,
where g j is an unknown strictly increasing function. Assume now that zit and ξt affect the joint
distribution of utilities only through the indices; i.e., letting λit = (λi1t , . . . , λiJt ), assume
Fv (·|χit ) = Fv (·|λit , xt , p t ) .
With this restriction, we can write the components of the demand system in Equation 18 as
σ j (λit , xt , p t ) ,

j = 1. . . . , J.

For the remainder of this section, we condition on xt —treating this in a completely general fashion
(2)
as we did xt in the previous section—and drop it from the notation.
Berry & Haile (2016) require sufficient variation in zit to generate a common choice probability
vector s¯ . That is, they require that there be some choice probability vector s¯ such that
s¯ ∈ St

∀t.

(20)

Because choice probabilities conditional on zit are observable, this assumption is verifiable. Furthermore, full support for g(zt ) is not required unless the support of the unobservable ξt is itself
RJ . In many industries, unobserved tastes/product characteristics vary across markets but not to
an extreme degree, so the variation in zit required need not be extreme. In particular, zit need
only move the choice probabilities to the common vector s¯ in each market; no probability needs
to be driven to zero or to 1, in contrast to the requirements of identification-at-infinity arguments. Indeed, such arguments typically use assumptions implying that every probability vector
is a common choice probability; here we require just one.
A key insight underlying Berry & Haile’s (2016) first approach is that variation in the value
of zt∗ (s¯ ) (recall Equation 19) across markets can be linked precisely to variation in the vector of
40

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

demand shocks ξt . Assuming that the demand system satisfies connected substitutes (now with
respect to the indices λi j t instead of δ j t ), the demand system can be inverted: For any choice
probability vector s and any price vector p t , there is at most one vector of indices λit such that
σ j (λit , p t ) = s j for all j . Of particular interest is the inverse at the common choice probability s¯ .
Because s¯ ∈ St for every market t, the invertibility result of Berry et al. (2013) ensures that for
each market there is a unique zt∗ (s¯ ) ∈ Zt such that st (zt∗ (s¯ )) = s¯ . Thus, we may write


g j z∗j t (s¯ ) + ξ j t = σ j−1 (s¯ , p t ).
(21)
4.1.2. Instruments. Berry & Haile (2016) provide conditions ensuring that each function g j is
identified. For simplicity, we take this as given for the remainder of this section. This is equivalent
to focusing on the case of a linear index structure
λi j t = zi j t β j + ξ j t ,
where each β j can be normalized to 1 without loss (setting the scale of the unobservable ξ j t ). This
allows us to rewrite Equation 21 as
z∗j t (s¯ ) = σ j−1 (s¯ , p t ) − ξ j t .

(22)

This equation takes exactly the form of the Newey-Powell nonparametric regression model in
Equation 13, with z∗j t (s¯ ) playing the role of the dependent variable, σ j−1 (s¯ , p t ) the unknown regression function, and ξ j t the error term correlated with the endogenous vector p t . Using this insight,
and focusing now on cross-market variation, identification of each function σ j−1 (·) (and therefore
each structural error ξ j t ) follows immediately from the result of Newey & Powell (2003) discussed
above, given excluded instruments wt for p t that satisfy the standard completeness condition. With
each ξ j t known, identification of demand is immediate.
Here, as in the case of market-level data, we require instruments for p t . However, we no longer
need instruments for st , which is held fixed at s¯ in Equation 22. To suggest why instruments
for shares are no longer needed, remember that in the case of market-level data, we relied on
instruments that provided variation in quantities (shares) even when the structural errors ξt and
prices p t were held fixed. We avoid this need by exploiting within-market variation in zit . Within
a market, ξt and p t are held fixed by construction, whereas variation in zit provides variation in
quantities. Thus, only instruments for p t are needed when we move to arguments that rely on
cross-market variation.9
Cost shifters and proxies are, as usual, important candidate instruments for p t . In addition,
in this micro data context, one could also use features of the market-level distribution of zt as
instruments for price. For example, if a market as a whole features unusually many high-income
consumers, prices in this market may be unusually high. This type of instrument is a variant of the
“characteristics of nearby markets” discussed in the case of market data, although here “nearby
consumers” can replace “nearby markets.” Berry & Haile (2016) call these Waldfogel instruments,
after the insight in Waldfogel (2003) that choice sets (including prices) naturally vary with the
local distribution of consumer types. To see why such instruments may be excludable, recall that
with micro data the observed choice probabilities already condition on the consumer’s own zit . So
the exclusion restriction is a requirement that there be no demand spillovers (or sorting affects)

9
Recalling the discussion in Section 3.4.2 of the relationship between derivatives of inverse shares with respect to quantities and
derivatives of shares with respect to quality indices, another intuition is that variation in zt reveals the patterns of substitution
between goods in response to changes in goods’ quality indices.

www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

41

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

that would require putting attributes of other consumers in the market in the micro-level demand
system.
The BLP instruments are not available as instruments here because we have conditioned on xt .
However, we have not imposed any condition requiring that rival characteristics x− j t be excluded
from the shifters of vi j t . Such a restriction can restore the availability of the BLP instruments, and
other functional form restrictions can reduce the number of instruments required even further.
To illustrate this, first suppose that we add p t to the index λ j t (z) so that
λi j t (z) = zi j t − αp j t + ξ j t .

(23)

z∗j t (s¯ ) = σ j−1 (s¯ ) + αp j t − ξ j t .

(24)

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

In this case, Equation 22 becomes

The first term σ j−1 (s¯ ) on the right-hand side is a constant; thus, we have a regression model with
just one endogenous variable. Alternatively, we could put a component of xt into the index:
(1)

λi j t (z) = zi j t + x j t β + ξ j t .
(1)

This would make xt available as (BLP) instruments for prices.

4.2. Utility Linear in z with Large Support
Berry & Haile (2016) consider a second approach using a slightly different specification in which
(zi1t , . . . , ziJt ) serve as special regressors (e.g., Lewbel 1998, 2000). This approach requires that
(zi1t , . . . , ziJt ) have large support, i.e., sufficient support to move choice probabilities to all points
on the simplex. This is a strong assumption, but special regressors with large support have been
used at least since Manski (1975, 1985) as a useful way to explore how far exogenous variation in
covariates can go toward eliminating the need for distributional assumptions in discrete choice
models. Berry & Haile (2016) take the same approach to explore how far variation in the demand
shifters zit can go in reducing the need for excluded instruments.
In the simplest version of this second approach,10 Berry & Haile (2016) assume that utilities
take the form
vi j t = λi j t + μi j t ,

j = 1, . . . , J,

(25)

where
λi j t = zi j t + ξ j t

(26)

as before, and the random variables (μi1t , . . . , μi1t ) have a joint distribution that does not depend
on λt :11
Fμ (·|χt ) = Fμ (·|xt , p t ) .

(27)

In addition, Berry & Haile (2016) impose the standard condition that the utility from good j
is unaffected by the observed characteristics of other goods. With Equation 27, this implies
Pr(μi j t < c |xt , p t , ξt ) = Pr(μi j t < c |x j t , p j t ).

(28)

10

As above, this version can be generalized to allow each zi j t to enter through an unknown monotonic function g j (·). Below
we discuss another variation that treats ξt more flexibly.

If Fμ depended freely on λt , what appears to be an additive separability restriction in Equation 25 would actually have no
content: The distribution of vit could still change freely with λt .

11

42

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

This specification is a nonparametric generalization of standard random coefficients models, in
which the utility from a good is a random function of its characteristics and price.12
Under the large support assumption

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

supp zit | (xt , p t , ξt ) = RJ ,

(29)

identification can be shown in two simple steps. First, by standard arguments, within-market
variation in zit traces out the joint distribution of (μi1t + ξ1t , . . . , μiJt + ξJt ) separately for each
market. This joint distribution also reveals, for each j , the marginal distribution of μi j t + ξ j t
in each market t. The second step then treats a functional of this marginal distribution as the
dependent variable in a nonparametric instrumental variables regression model. For example, by
Equation 28, for a given j the mean (or any given quantile) τ j t of this marginal distribution must
satisfy
τ j t = h j (x j t , p j t ) + ξ j t

(30)

for some (unknown) function h j . Once again, we can condition on x j t without loss, yielding an
equation taking the form of the regression model studied by Newey & Powell (2003). Because
τ j t can be treated as observed (by the first step), identification of the function h j (and then the
residuals ξ j t ) requires instruments satisfying a standard completeness condition. Because there
is now only one price entering h j , identification can be obtained with only a single instrument.
Furthermore, in this case, all the instrument types discussed above are candidates; in particular,
the BLP instruments x− j t were not fixed in the derivation of Equation 30, so they are available
as instruments. In addition, because Equation 30 requires only one instrument at a time, a single
market-level instrument (e.g., a single Waldfogel instrument) could potentially suffice.
The model above can be generalized by dropping the requirement that utilities be separable
in the demand shocks ξ j t . Consider the specification
vi j t = zi j t β + μ̃i j t
with the joint distribution of μ̃it now permitted to depend on ξt :
Fμ (·|χt ) = Fμ (·|xt , p t , ξt ) .
Under an appropriate monotonicity condition—for example, let μi j t be stochastically increasing in
ξkt when j = k but independent of ξkt otherwise—repeating the analysis above yields an equation
taking the form of a nonparametric instrumental variables regression with a nonseparable error.
For example, Berry & Haile (2016) show that under appropriate assumptions the mean of the
marginal distribution of μ̃i j t would take the form
τ j t = h j (x j t , p j t , ξ j t ),

(31)

where h j is strictly increasing ξ j t . Chernozhukov & Hansen (2005) demonstrate identification
of such a nonseparable nonparametric regression model under modified completeness conditions
that (at least in the case of a continuous endogenous dependent variable) are somewhat harder to
interpret than the standard completeness condition used by Newey & Powell (2003). However,
whether we use the model with separable ξ j t leading to Equation 30 or the more general model
leading to Equation 31, this second class of (separable in z) models studied by Berry & Haile
(2016) has the advantage of minimizing the number of instruments required while maximizing
the availability of candidate instruments.
For example, one obtains this structure by assuming that vi j t = zi j t + ξ j t + v(x j t , p j t , θit ) for all j , where θ j is an infinitedimensional random parameter whose distribution does not depend on χit .

12

www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

43

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

5. SUPPLY

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

Many positive and normative questions regarding differentiated products markets require a quantitative understanding of supply as well as demand. In a static oligopoly context, the primitives of
a supply model are marginal cost functions and a specification of oligopoly competition. Because
reliable marginal cost data are seldom available, there is a long tradition in the empirical industrial
organization literature of estimating marginal costs using firm first-order conditions.
A very early example is provided by Rosse (1970), who considers a model of monopoly newspaper publishers, and the key insight of this literature is particularly transparent in the case of
monopoly. Marginal revenue is a function of observed quantity, observed price, and the slope of
demand. If the slope of demand is already known, marginal cost is revealed directly as equal to
marginal revenue. Rosse (1970) considers joint estimation of demand and marginal cost parameters from a combination of demand equations and monopoly first-order conditions. Elements of
this approach are carried over to oligopoly models in the New Empirical Industrial Organization
literature (see, e.g., Bresnahan 1981, 1989). That literature also asks whether the hypothesis of a
particular form of oligopoly competition is falsifiable. The widely used approach of BLP involves
combining estimates of demand parameters with first-order conditions characterizing equilibrium
in a given oligopoly model (typically multiproduct oligopoly price setting) to solve for marginal
costs and parameters of marginal cost functions.
Below we discuss nonparametric identification results that build on these earlier insights.13
We discuss identification of marginal costs, identification of marginal cost functions, and discrimination between particular models of oligopoly competition. For the remainder of this section,
we do this treating demand as known, reflecting the results above on identification of demand.
However, in Section 6, we discuss results obtained by treating demand and supply explicitly as a
fully simultaneous system.

5.1. Identification of Marginal Costs with a Known Oligopoly Model
When the model of oligopoly competition is known, identification of equilibrium marginal costs
follows almost immediately from identification of demand. Let mc j t denote the equilibrium
marginal cost of good j in market t.14 Given the connected substitutes condition on demand
(now with respect to prices), Berry & Haile (2014) point out that for a wide variety of static
oligopoly models there exists a known function ψ j such that in equilibrium
mc j t = ψ j (st , M t , Dt (st , p t ), p t ) ,

(32)

where Dt (st , p t ) is the matrix of partial derivatives ∂σk /∂ p  . Here M t is the scalar number of
potential consumers in market t (market size), so the level of demand is q j t = M t s j t .
If the function ψ j is known, then mc j t is directly identified from Equation 32 once the demand
derivatives Dt are identified. Because most standard oligopoly models imply a known functional
form for ψ j , identification of the level of marginal cost then follows directly from the identification
of demand.
In the simple case of monopoly, ψ j is just the standard marginal revenue function. More
generally, the function ψ j can be interpreted as a generalized product-specific marginal revenue
function. For example, in the case of single-product firms setting prices in a static Nash equilibrium,

13

There are important questions about identification when firms make discrete supply decisions—e.g., entry or introduction
of new products—as well as identification of dynamic oligopoly models. These are beyond the scope of this review.

14

44

In general, this is the marginal cost of good j in market t conditional on the observed values of all relevant quantities.

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

firm j ’s first-order condition can be written
mc j t = p j t +

1
M ts jt.
∂s j t /∂ p j t

(33)

The right-hand side of Equation 33 can be interpreted as the change in revenue that results from
a price decrease sufficient to increase the quantity by one unit, holding constant the prices of other
products. With multiproduct firms and simultaneous price setting (as in the BLP model), each
function ψ j is obtained by solving a simultaneous system of first-order conditions. The vector of
marginal costs for all goods in market t is given by

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

mct = p t + −1
t st ,

(34)

where t is a matrix with ( j, k)-entry equal to ∂skt /∂ p j t when goods j and k are produced by the
same firm, and zero otherwise.

5.2. Identification of Marginal Cost Functions
When the right-hand side of Equation 32 is known, this equation immediately yields identification
of the level of market each cost mc j t . Knowledge of the equilibrium level of marginal costs is
sufficient to address some types of questions. But unless one assumes constant marginal costs,
many counterfactuals of interest will require knowing how these costs vary with output.
Typically, one might specify a marginal cost function of the form


(35)
mc j t = c j q j t , w j t + ω j t ,
where w j t and ω j t are observed and unobserved cost shifters, respectively. With the values of
mc j t known, Equation 35 takes the form of a standard separable nonparametric regression, as in
Newey & Powell (2003). Identification of the unknown function c j requires an instrument for the
endogenous variables in Equation 35. Typically, one assumes that the observed cost shifters are
mean independent of ω j t . In that case, a single excluded instrument for the endogenous quantity
q j t can suffice.
Natural instruments for q j t include the exogenous cost shifters w− j t of other goods. Other
potential instruments are also likely to be available as well. Demand shifters of own and rival
products or firms are all possible instruments, if they are properly excluded from own-product
marginal costs. Market-level factors that influence the level of demand (e.g., total population and
the population of various demographic groups) are other possible instruments.
Given identification of demand, the problem of finding an appropriate number of instruments
is much easier on the cost side than on the demand side. In the simplest case, there is only one
endogenous variable in the marginal cost function but possibly many available cost and demand
instruments. This availability of instruments means that richer specifications of the marginal
cost functions may be accommodated. For example, in some applications, one may wish to allow
production spillovers across goods produced by the same firm. This could introduce the entire
vector Q j of a firm’s own quantities (all endogenous) as arguments of the marginal cost function
c j . In many cases, there will be excluded instruments available of dimension even larger than that
of Q j .

5.3. Identifying Cost Shocks with an Unknown Oligopoly Model
Berry & Haile (2014) show that one need not specify the oligopoly model in order to identify the
latent shocks to marginal costs, ω j t . This can be directly useful because it allows identification of
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

45

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

the reduced form for equilibrium prices, which can be used to answer some kinds of counterfactual
questions without specifying the form of oligopoly competition. Identification of the latent cost
shocks also leads to the most straightforward and powerful of their results on discrimination
between alternative oligopoly models, a topic we take up in the following section.
Here we continue to assume that Equation 33 holds but allow the form of the function ψ j to be
unknown. Thus, we relax the assumption of a known oligopoly model and require only that some
relation of the form of Equation 33 exist. To allow this relaxation, we require an index structure
on the marginal cost function similar to one exploited previously on the demand side.15 Partition
(1)
(2)
(1)
the cost shifters as {w j t , w j t }, with w j t ∈ R, and define the cost indices
(1)

κ jt = w jt γ j + ω jt,

j = 1, . . . , J,

(36)

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

where each parameter γ j may be normalized to 1 without loss. Suppose now that the cost shifter
(1)
w j t and the cost shock ω j t enter marginal costs only through the index. In particular, assume that
each marginal cost function c j (q j t , w j t , ω j t ) can be rewritten as


(2)
c j q jt, κ jt, w jt ,
where c j is strictly increasing in κ j t .
(2)
Now fix w j t , treating it fully generally, and drop it from the notation. Let w j t now represent
(1)

w j t . Berry & Haile (2014) show that the supply-side first-order conditions can be inverted to
obtain relations of the form
κ j t = π −1
j (st , p t ) ,
where each

π −1
j

is an unknown function.

16

(37)

Rewriting this as

w j t = π −1
j (st , p t ) − ω j t ,

(38)

we obtain an equation taking exactly the form of the inverted demand equations (Equation 12)
and, therefore, each ω j t can thus be obtained using
above. Identification of the functions π −1
j
the same extension of Newey & Powell (2003) relied on in Section 3.3, now with (xt , wt ) as the
instruments.
(2)
(2)
Because here we have fixed not only xt but also wt , the instrumental variables requirement
is more demanding than that for the parallel result on identification of demand. In particular, the
(1)
demand shifters xt [i.e., xt ] must now be excluded from marginal costs. In some applications,
product characteristics will vary without affecting firm costs due to technological constraints (e.g.,
satellite television reception in Goolsbee & Petrin 2004) or other exogenous market-specific factors (climate, topography, transportation network). In other cases, product characteristics that
shift demand may alter fixed costs rather than marginal costs—for example, quality produced
through research and development, a product’s geographic location, or product-specific advertising (e.g., Goeree 2008). Other examples of instruments that can play the role of xt here involve
interactions between market and product characteristics. For example, Berry et al. (1995) point
out that conditional on the product characteristic “miles per gallon” (which might affect marginal
cost), the characteristic “miles per dollar” is a demand shifter that is properly excluded from the
marginal cost function.
15

This structure is also used below when we discuss identification of demand and supply within a single simultaneous system.

This function is the composition of the inverse (with respect to κ j t ) of the marginal cost function and the generalized
product-specific marginal revenue function ψ j appearing in the first-order condition for good j . We use the notation π −1 as
a reminder that this relation is obtained by inverting the equilibrium map to express the cost index κ j t in terms of the market
outcomes (st , p t ).

16

46

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Given identification of the inverted demand functions σ j−1 and the functions π −1
j , total differentiation of the system
x j t + ξ j t = σ j−1 (st , p t )

∀ j,

w j t + ω j t = π −1
j (st , p t )

∀ j,

(39)

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

will reveal the response of quantities and prices to the exogenous shifters (xt , wt ). This is true
even when the interpretation of π −1
j is not yet established via appeal to some particular oligopoly
model. In Section 6, we return to this system of simultaneous equations to consider a different
approach to identification.

5.4. Discrimination Between Models of Firm Conduct
An important early literature in industrial organization explored discrimination between alternative models of firm conduct (see, e.g., Bresnahan 1989, and references therein). This literature
was developed on the important insight from Bresnahan (1982) that “rotations of demand” can
alter equilibrium markups differently in different models of supply. Thus, the price response to
such rotations might be used to infer the true model. A formalization of this idea was developed
by Lau (1982), although the result was limited to conjectural variations models with nonstochastic
demand and cost, homogeneous goods, and symmetric firms. Berry & Haile (2014) show that
none of these limitations is essential, and that Bresnahan’s intuition can be generalized to provide an approach for discriminating between alternative models in a much less restrictive setting.
Moreover, in the differentiated products context, there are many different types of variation that
can be exploited, not just the rotations of market demand considered by Bresnahan (1982) and
Lau (1982).
The most straightforward results of this type in Berry & Haile (2014) take advantage of the
results in the previous section. Suppose that we have already identified each cost index κ j t as well
as the demand derivatives in each market. Consider again the first-order condition


c j q j t , κ j t = ψ j (st , M t , Dt (st , p t ) , p t ) ,
(40)
where the function ψ j is that implied by a hypothesized model of oligopoly competition. An
implication of this hypothesis is that all observations ( j t combinations) with the same values of q j t
and κ j t must have the same value for the right-hand side of Equation 40 as well. If we misspecify
the model, this restriction will often fail: Different values of marginal cost will be required to
rationalize the data, even though all shifters of marginal costs have be held fixed. Such a finding
will falsify a misspecified oligopoly model.
As the simplest example (and one that makes a tight connection to Bresnahan 1982), suppose
that there is a single producer setting prices and quantities as a profit-maximizing monopolist. If
we mistakenly hypothesize that the firm prices at marginal cost, Equation 40 becomes


(41)
c j q jt, κ jt = p jt;
i.e., ψ j (st , M t , Dt (st , p t ) , p t ) is just p j t . This hypothesis would be falsified if (for example) there
are two markets with the same (q j t , κ j t , p j t ) but different demand derivatives. Berry & Haile (2014)
show how this can arise when there is a nonparallel shift in demand.
However, changes in demand are just one type of variation that can reveal misspecification
of the oligopoly model though the restriction given in Equation 40. In general, a model can be
falsified whenever there is variation between two markets t and t  or products j and j  that (a)
leaves the relation between quantities and marginal cost unchanged [i.e., c j (·, κ j t ) = c j  (·, κ j  t  )], (b)
yields q j t = q j  t  under the true model, and (c) would imply q j t = q j  t  under the false model. Even if
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

47

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

preferences and market size do not change (demand is fixed), one can obtain a contradiction under
a misspecified model from variation in the number of competing firms, the set of competing
goods, observed or unobserved characteristics of competing products, or observed/unobserved
cost shifters of competitors. Berry & Haile (2014) provide several examples. They also show how
the insights described here can be generalized to apply without requiring identification of the
marginal cost shocks and, therefore, without the cost-side index structure relied on in Section 5.3.

6. IDENTIFICATION IN A SIMULTANEOUS SYSTEM

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

Although the main challenge to identification in differentiated products markets is the simultaneous determination of prices and quantities, our approach in the identification results presented
above was sequential. We began by demonstrating identification of demand without specifying a
model of supply; then, given knowledge of demand, we showed how the primitives of supply could
be identified. An alternative is to directly consider identification of the fully simultaneous model
of differentiated products demand and supply.
Berry & Haile (2014) explore such an approach, using the same kind of index structure (on
both the demand and cost sides) relied on in Section 5.3. In particular, they consider identification
of the system of 2J equations in Equation 39. These equations exhibit what Berry & Haile (2015)
call a “residual index structure,” as each structural error enters the model through an index that
also depends on an equation-specific observable. This class of models was introduced by Matzkin
(2008) and is also studied by Matzkin (2015) and Berry & Haile (2015).17
The results in this literature show that it is possible to make trade-offs between (a) support
conditions on the instruments (here xt , wt ) and (b) shape restrictions on the joint density of the
unobservables (here ξt , ωt ). At one extreme, Berry & Haile (2014, 2015) show identification of the
system of Equations 39 under an assumption that the instruments have large support, but with no
restriction on the density of unobservables. At the other extreme, Berry & Haile (2015) show that
even with arbitrarily small support for the instruments, failure of identification occurs only under
strong restrictions on the joint density of unobservables. These results can be extended, appealing
to results from Matzkin (2008) or Berry & Haile (2015), to models of the form
g j (x j t ) + ξ j t = σ j−1 (st , p t )
h j (w j t ) + ω j t =

π −1
j

(st , p t )

∀ j,
∀ j,

where the functions g j and h j are unknown strictly increasing functions.18
The simultaneous equations approach contrasts with the approaches in the previous sections
that rely on completeness conditions to establish identification. A disadvantage of identification
results relying on completeness conditions is a lack of transparency about the kinds of assumptions
on economic primitives that will generate completeness. A related point is that identification proofs
relying on completeness conditions provide little insight about how the observables uniquely
determine the primitives; formally, identification is proved by contradiction. In contrast, the
results from the simultaneous equations literature rely on explicit conditions on the primitives of
the supply and demand model and permit constructive identification proofs.

17

Matzkin (2015) also provides conditions for identification of certain features of nonparametric simultaneous equations
models that partially relax the residual index structure.

18

Identification of this system does not require assuming a particular form of oligopoly supply, although doing so allows
identification of firms’ marginal costs, using Equation 32. Because imposing oligopoly first-order conditions directly on the
system of equations would introduce cross-equation restrictions, an interesting question is whether this could allow relaxation
of identification conditions.

48

Berry

·

Haile

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

7. CONCLUSION
Above we review recent nonparametric identification results for models of discrete choice demand
and oligopoly supply that are widely used in empirical economics. The primary message of these
results is that identification holds under precisely the kinds of instrumental variables conditions
required for more familiar (e.g., regression) models. Most of the results exploit (a) an index restriction on the way structural errors enter an otherwise fully flexible model and (b) the invertibility of
the demand system that holds under the mild connected substitutes condition. Identification then
relies on the presence of sufficient exogenous sources of variation in prices and quantities—i.e., on
the standard requirement of adequate instruments for the endogenous variables. The results also
show how the standard practice of specifying a form of competition on the supply side leads to
falsifiable restrictions that can be used to discriminate between alternative models of firm conduct.
The results discussed here may suggest alternative, even nonparametric, estimation and testing approaches. But we believe the results are important regardless of the statistical tools used
in practice. Economists have long recognized the distinction between identifiability of a model
and properties of any particular estimator or test (e.g., Koopmans 1945, 1950; Hurwicz 1950;
Koopmans & Reiersol 1950). Because every data set is finite, going beyond mere description of
the data requires reliance on approximation techniques. Robustness to alternative specifications is
therefore a concern in every application. But a nonparametric identification result demonstrates
that functional forms and distributional assumptions relied on in finite samples can correctly be
viewed as tools of approximation rather than essential maintained hypotheses. Scholars and policy makers should have greater confidence in the value of empirical work when it is known that
the essential role of functional form and distributional assumptions is limited to the unavoidable
jobs of approximation, extrapolation, and compensation for the gap between the exogenous variation available in practice and that sufficient to distinguish between all admissible nonparametric
structures.
At a more practical level, the results discussed here provide important guidance regarding the
types of instruments that can suffice in practice, as well as available trade-offs among the types
of data available, the flexibility of the model, and the demands on instrumental variables. With
market-level data, the results for the most general model require instruments for all prices and
quantities: exogenous shifters of (or proxies for) costs or markups as well as the BLP instruments
that, besides altering markups, shift market shares directly. However, individual-level micro data
can eliminate the need for market share instruments, and some special cases require only a single exogenous price shifter to identify demand. Given identification of demand, identification
of marginal costs requires no additional instruments, and identification of firms’ marginal cost
functions can be attained with as few as one excluded instrument that shifts equilibrium quantities
across markets.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

LITERATURE CITED
Ackerberg D. 2003. Advertising learning and customer choice in experience good markets: a structural empirical examination. Int. Econ. Rev. 44:1007–40
Allenby GM, Rossi PE. 1999. Marketing models of consumer heterogeneity. J. Econom. 89:57–78
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

49

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Altonji J, Matzkin RL. 2005. Cross-section and panel data estimators for nonseparable models with endogenous
regressors. Econometrica 73:1053–102
Andrews DWK. 2011. Examples of l2 -complete and boundedly complete distributions. Discuss. Pap. 1801, Cowles
Found., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT
Armstrong TB. 2015. Large market asymptotics for differentiated product demand estimators with economic models
of supply. Work. Pap., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT
Athey S, Imbens GW. 2007. Discrete choice models with multiple unobserved choice characteristics. Int. Econ.
Rev. 48:1159–92
Bayer P, Ferreira F, McMillan R. 2007. A unified framework for measuring preferences for schools and
neighborhoods. J. Polit. Econ. 115:588–638
Bayer P, Timmins C. 2007. Estimating equilibrium models of sorting across locations. Econ. J. 117:353–74
Berry ST. 1994. Estimating discrete choice models of product differentiation. RAND J. Econ. 23:242–62
Berry ST, Gandhi A, Haile PA. 2013. Connected substitutes and invertibility of demand. Econometrica 81:2087–
111
Berry ST, Haile PA. 2014. Identification in differentiated products markets using market level data.
Econometrica 82:1749–97
Berry ST, Haile PA. 2015. Nonparametric identification of simultaneous equations models with a residual index
structure. Work. Pap., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT
Berry ST, Haile PA. 2016. Nonparametric identification of multinomial choice demand models with heterogeneous
consumers. Work. Pap., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT
Berry ST, Levinsohn J, Pakes A. 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica 60:889–917
Berry ST, Levinsohn J, Pakes A. 1999. Voluntary export restraints on automobiles: evaluating a strategic trade
policy. Am. Econ. Rev. 89:189–211
Blundell R, Matzkin RL. 2014. Control functions in nonseparable simultaneous equations models. Quant.
Econ. 5:271–95
Blundell RW, Powell JL. 2004. Endogeneity in semiparametric binary response models. Rev. Econ. Stud.
71:655–79
Bresnahan T. 1981. Departures from marginal cost pricing in the American automobile industry. J. Econom.
17:201–27
Bresnahan T. 1982. The oligopoly solution concept is identified. Econ. Lett. 10:82–97
Bresnahan T. 1987. Competition and collusion in the American automobile oligopoly: the 1955 price war.
J. Ind. Econ. 35:457–82
Bresnahan T. 1989. Empirical studies of industries with market power. In The Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 2, ed. R Schamlensee, R Willig, pp. 1011–57. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Briesch RA, Chintagunta PK, Matzkin RL. 2010. Nonparametric discrete choice models with unobserved
heterogeneity. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 28:291–307
Bundorf K, Levin J, Mahoney N. 2012. Pricing and welfare in health plan choice. Am. Econ. Rev. 102:3214–48
Burda M, Harding M, Hausman J. 2015. A Bayesian mixed logit-probit model for multinomial choice. J. Appl.
Econ. 30:353–76
Capps C, Dranove D, Satterthwaite M. 2003. Competition and market power in option demand markets.
RAND J. Econ. 34:737–63
Cardon J, Hendel I. 2001. Asymmetric information in health care and health insurance markets: evidence
from the National Medical Expenditure Survey. RAND J. Econ. 32:408–27
Chernozhukov V, Hansen C. 2005. An IV model of quantile treatment effects. Econometrica 73:245–61
Chintagunta PK, Honoré BE. 1996. Investigating the effects of marketing variables and unobserved heterogeneity in a multinomial probit model. Int. J. Mark. Res. 13:1–15
Eizenberg A. 2014. Upstream innovation and product variety in the United States home PC market. Rev. Econ.
Stud. 81:1003–45
Fan Y. 2013. Ownership consolidation and product characteristics: a study of the U.S. daily newspaper market.
Am. Econ. Rev. 103:1598–628
Fox J, Gandhi A. 2011. Identifying demand with multi-dimensional unobservables: a random functions approach.
Work. Pap., Univ. Wisconsin–Madison

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

50

Berry

·

Haile

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Fox J, Gandhi A. 2016. Nonparametric identification and estimation of random coefficients in multinomial
choice models. RAND J. Econ. 47:118–39
Gale D, Nikaido H. 1965. The Jacobian matrix and global univalence of mappings. Math. Ann. 159:81–93
Gentzkow M, Shapiro J. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. newspapers. Econometrica 78:35–
71
Goeree MS. 2008. Limited information and advertising in the US personal computer industry. Econometrica
76:1017–74
Goldberg PK. 1995. Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: the case of the U.S.
automobile industry. Econometrica 63:891–951
Goldberg PK. 1998. The effects of the corporate average fuel economy standards in the automobile industry.
J. Ind. Econ. 46:1–33
Goldberg PK, Verboven F. 2001. The evolution of price dispersion in the European car market. Rev. Econ.
Stud. 68:811–48
Goolsbee A, Petrin A. 2004. The consumer gains from direct broadcast satellites and the competition with
cable TV. Econometrica 72:351–81
Gordon B, Hartmann WR. 2013. Advertising effects in presidential elections. Mark. Sci. 32:19–35
Hastings J, Kane T, Staiger D. 2010. Heterogeneous preferences and the efficacy of public school choice. Work. Pap.,
Brown Univ., Providence, RI
Hausman JA. 1996. Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition. In The Economics of New
Goods, ed. TF Bresnahan, RJ Gordon, pp. 209–48. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
Ho K. 2009. Insurer-provider networks in the medical care market. Am. Econ. Rev. 99:393–430
Hoderlein S. 2009. Endogenous semiparametric binary choice models with heteroskedasticity. Work. Pap. 747, Boston
Coll., Chestnut Hill, MA
Hong H, Tamer E. 2003. Endogenous binary choice model with median restrictions. Econ. Lett. 80:219–25
Honoré BE, Lewbel A. 2002. Semiparametric binary choice panel data models without strictly exogenous
regressors. Econometrica 70:2053–63
Hurwicz L. 1950. Generalization of the concept of identification. See Koopmans 1950, pp. 245–57
Ichimura H, Thompson TS. 1998. Maximum likelihood estimation of a binary choice model with random
coefficients of unknown distribution. J. Econom. 86:269–95
Koopmans TC. 1945. Statistical estimation of simultaneous economic relations. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 40:448–66
Koopmans TC, ed. 1950. Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models. New York: Wiley
Koopmans TC, Reiersol O. 1950. The identification of structural characteristics. Ann. Math. Stat. 21:165–81
Lau L. 1982. On identifying the degree of competitiveness from industry price and output data. Econ. Lett.
10:93–99
Lehmann EL, Scheffe H. 1950. Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation: part I. Sankhya
10:305–40
Lehmann EL, Scheffe H. 1955. Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation: part II. Sankhya
15:219–36
Lewbel A. 1998. Semiparametric latent variable model estimation with endogenous or mismeasured regressors.
Econometrica 66:105–21
Lewbel A. 2000. Semiparametric qualitative response model estimation with unknown heteroscedasticity or
instrumental variables. J. Econom. 97:145–77
Lewbel A. 2006. Simple endogenous binary choice and selection panel model estimators. Work. Pap. 613, Boston
Coll., Chestnut Hill, MA
Lustig J. 2010. The welfare effects of adverse selection in privatized medicare. Work. Pap., Boston Univ., Boston,
MA
Magnac T, Maurin E. 2007. Identification and information in monotone binary models. J. Econom. 139:76–104
Manski CF. 1975. Maximum score estimation of the stochastic utility model of choice. J. Econom. 3:205–28
Manski CF. 1985. Semiparametric analysis of discrete response: asymptotic properties of the maximum score
estimator. J. Econom. 27:313–33
Manski CF. 1987. Semiparametric analysis of random effects linear models from binary panel data. Econometrica
55:357–62
www.annualreviews.org • Identification in Differentiated Products Markets

51

ARI

27 September 2016

19:7

Manski CF. 1988. Identification of binary response models. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 83:729–38
Matzkin RL. 1992. Nonparametric and distribution-free estimation of the binary choice and threshold crossing
models. Econometrica 60:239–70
Matzkin RL. 1993. Nonparametric identification and estimation of polychotomous choice models. J. Econom.
58:137–68
Matzkin RL. 2008. Identification in nonparametric simultaneous equations. Econometrica 76:945–78
Matzkin RL. 2015. Estimation of nonparametric models with simultaneity. Econometrica 83:1–66
McFadden D. 1974. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In Frontiers of Econometrics, ed.
P Zarembka, pp. 105–42. New York: Academic
McFadden D. 1981. Econometric models of probabilistic choice. In Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with
Econometric Applications, ed. C Manski, D McFadden, pp. 198–272. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
McFadden D, Talvitie A, Cosslett S, Hasan I, Johnson M, et al. 1977. Demand model estimation and validation.
Rep. UCB-ITS-SR077-9, Inst. Transp. Stud., Berkeley, CA
Mussa M, Rosen S. 1978. Monopoly and product quality. J. Econ. Theory 18:301–7
Nair H, Chintagunta P, Dube JP. 2004. Empirical analysis of indirect network effects in the market for personal
digital assistants. Quant. Mark. Econ. 2:23–58
Neilson C. 2013. Targeted vouchers, competition among schools, and the academic achievement of poor students. Work.
Pap., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT
Nevo A. 2000. Mergers with differentiated products: the case of the ready-to-eat cereal industry. RAND J.
Econ. 31:395–421
Nevo A. 2001. Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica 69:307–42
Newey WK, Powell JL. 2003. Instrumental variable estimation in nonparametric models. Econometrica
71:1565–78
Palais RS. 1959. Natural operations on differential forms. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 92:125–41
Petrin A. 2002. Quantifying the benefits of new products: the case of the minivan. J. Polit. Econ. 110:705–29
Petrin A, Gandhi A. 2011. Identification and estimation in discrete choice demand models when endogeneous variables
interact with the error. Work. Pap., Univ. Minn., Minneapolis
Reynaert M, Verboven F. 2014. Improving the performance of random coefficients demand models: the role
of optimal instruments. J. Econom. 179:83–98
Rosse JN. 1970. Estimating cost function parameters without using cost function data: an illustrated methodology. Econometrica 38:256–75
Rysman M. 2004. Competition between networks: a study of the market for yellow pages. Rev. Econ. Stud.
71:483–512
Villas-Boas SB. 2007. Vertical relationships between manufacturers and retailers: inference with limited data.
Rev. Econ. Stud. 74:625–52
Waldfogel J. 2003. Preference externalities: an empirical study of who benefits whom in differentiated-product
markets. RAND J. Econ. 34:557–68

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

EC08CH02-Haile

52

Berry

·

Haile

EC08-FrontMatter

ARI

13 October 2016

7:48

Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

Contents

Annual Review of
Economics
Volume 8, 2016

Choice Complexity and Market Competition
Ran Spiegler p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 1
Identification in Differentiated Products Markets
Steven Berry and Philip Haile p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p27
Econometric Analysis of Large Factor Models
Jushan Bai and Peng Wang p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p53
Forecasting in Economics and Finance
Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p81
International Comparative Household Finance
Cristian Badarinza, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 111
Paternalism and Energy Efficiency: An Overview
Hunt Allcott p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 145
Savings After Retirement: A Survey
Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 177
The China Shock: Learning from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large
Changes in Trade
David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 205
Patents and Innovation in Economic History
Petra Moser p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 241
Methods for Nonparametric and Semiparametric Regressions with
Endogeneity: A Gentle Guide
Xiaohong Chen and Yin Jia Jeff Qiu p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 259
Health Care Spending: Historical Trends and New Directions
Alice Chen and Dana Goldman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 291
Reputation and Feedback Systems in Online Platform Markets
Steven Tadelis p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 321
Recent Advances in the Measurement Error Literature
Susanne M. Schennach p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 341

v

EC08-FrontMatter

ARI

13 October 2016

7:48

Measuring and Modeling Attention
Andrew Caplin p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 379
The Evolution of Gender Gaps in Industrialized Countries
Claudia Olivetti and Barbara Petrongolo p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 405
Bunching
Henrik Jacobsen Kleven p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 435
Why Has the Cyclicality of Productivity Changed? What Does It Mean?
John G. Fernald and J. Christina Wang p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 465
Annu. Rev. Econ. 2016.8:27-52. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Zurich - Hauptbibliothek on 08/13/20. For personal use only.

Infrequent but Long-Lived Zero Lower Bound Episodes and the Optimal
Rate of Inflation
Marc Dordal i Carreras, Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko,
and Johannes Wieland p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 497
Active Labor Market Policies
Bruno Crépon and Gerard J. van den Berg p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 521
The Effects of Unemployment Insurance Benefits: New Evidence and
Interpretation
Johannes F. Schmieder and Till von Wachter p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 547
Nonlinear Pricing
Mark Armstrong p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 583
Peer-to-Peer Markets
Liran Einav, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 615
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 4–8 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 637
Cumulative Index of Article Titles, Volumes 4–8 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 640
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Economics articles may be found at
http://www.annualreviews.org/errata/economics

vi

Contents

