CHAPTER 8

Field Experiments on Discriminationa
M. Bertrand*, 1, E. Duﬂox
*University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, IL, United States
x
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States
1
Corresponding author: E-mail: Marianne.Bertrand@chicagobooth.edu

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Measuring Discrimination in the Field
2.1 Audit studies
2.1.1 Limitations of audit studies

2.2 Correspondence studies
2.2.1 Correspondence studies in the labor market

2.3 Correspondence studies in other settings
2.3.1 Rental markets
2.3.2 Retail
2.3.3 Academia

2.4 Beyond the resumes
2.5 Limitations of correspondence studies
2.6 Implicit association tests
2.7 Goldberg paradigm experiments
2.8 List randomization
2.9 Willingness to pay
3. Consequences of Discrimination
3.1 Self-expectancy effects

318

319
320

328
328
328
330

330
331
336
340
341
343
345
345

3.1.1 Stereotype threat and underperformance
3.1.2 Identity and preferences

345
348

3.2 Expectancy effects and self-fulﬁlling prophecies

350

3.2.1 Pygmalion and Golem effects
3.2.2 Endogenous responses to bias

3.3 Discrimination in politics and inequality across groups
3.4 Beneﬁts of diversity?
3.4.1 Does homogeneity hurt or help productivity?
3.4.2 Discrimination and corruption
3.4.3 Law of small numbers

4. What Affects Discrimination?
4.1 Leaders and role models
4.1.1 Does diversity in leadership positions directly affect discrimination?
4.1.2 Minority leaders and the attitude of the majority
a

310
315
316

350
353

354
355
355
357
359

359
359
360
361

Laura Stilwell and Jan Zilinsky provided excellent research assistance. We thank Abhijit Banerjee for comments. We
are particularly grateful to Betsy Levy Paluck, our discussant, for her detailed and thoughtful review of an earlier draft.

Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Volume 1
ISSN 2214-658X, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.hefe.2016.08.004

© 2017 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

309

310

Handbook of Field Experiments

4.1.3 Role models, aspirations, and the attitude of the minority

4.2 Intergroup contact
4.3 Sociocognitive debiasing strategies
4.4 Technological debiasing
5. Conclusion
References

363

365
369
378
382
383

Abstract
This article reviews the existing ﬁeld experimentation literature on the prevalence of discrimination, the
consequences of such discrimination, and possible approaches to undermine it. We highlight key gaps
in the literature and ripe opportunities for future ﬁeld work. Section 2 reviews the various experimental
methods that have been employed to measure the prevalence of discrimination, most notably audit
and correspondence studies; it also describes several other measurement tools commonly used in labbased work that deserve greater consideration in ﬁeld research. Section 3 provides an overview of the
literature on the costs of being stereotyped or discriminated against, with a focus on self-expectancy
effects and self-fulﬁlling prophecies; Section 4 also discusses the thin ﬁeld-based literature on the consequences of limited diversity in organizations and groups. The ﬁnal section of the paper, Section 4,
reviews the evidence for policies and interventions aimed at weakening discrimination, covering
role model and intergroup contact effects, as well as sociocognitive and technological debiasing
strategies.

Keywords
Audit studies; Contact hypothesis; Correspondence studies; Costs of discrimination; Psychology and
economics

JEL Codes
A33: Handbooks; J15: Economics of Minorities, Races, Indigenous Peoples, and Immigrants e Nonlabor Discrimination; J16: Economics of Gender e Non-labor Discrimination; J71: Labor Discrimination

1. INTRODUCTION
Black people are less likely to be employed, more likely to be arrested by the police, and
more likely to be incarcerated. Women are very scarce at the top echelon of the corporate, academic, and political ladders despite the fact that (in rich countries at least) they get
better grades in school and are more likely to graduate from college. While many in the
media and public opinion circles argue that discrimination is a key force in driving these
patterns, showing that it is actually the case is not simple. Indeed, it has proven elusive to
produce convincing evidence of discrimination using standard regression analysis
methods and observational data, in the sense in which we deﬁne discrimination
throughout this chapter: members of a minority group (women, blacks, Muslims, immigrants, etc.) are treated differentially (less favorably) than members of a majority group
with otherwise identical characteristics in similar circumstances.
However, over the last couple of decades, a rich literature in economics, sociology,
political science, and psychology has leveraged experiments (in the lab and in the ﬁeld)

Field Experiments on Discrimination

to provide convincing evidence that discrimination, thus deﬁned, indeed exists. We
begin this chapter by describing the various experimental methods that have been used
to measure discrimination in the ﬁeld. Overall, this literature offers staggering evidence
of pervasive discrimination against minority or underrepresented groups all around the
world. We summarize this research and discuss some of its key limitations.
If discrimination is as pervasive as the evidence suggests, what do existing theories tell
us about the costs to minority groups and to society overall? The two workhorse models
of discrimination in the economic literature give drastically different answers, particularly
with respect to the societal consequences. In the ﬁrst model, developed by Becker (1957)
for the context of the labor market, some employers have a distaste for hiring members of
the minority group. They may indulge this distaste by refusing to hire, say, blacks or, if
they do hire them, paying them less than other employees for the same level of productivity. If the fraction of discriminating employers in the economy is sufﬁciently large, a
wage differential will emerge in equilibrium between otherwise identically productive
minority and majority employees, and this wage differential will be a reﬂection of the
distaste parameter of the marginal employer for minority workers (Becker, 1957; Charles
and Guryan, 2008). By electing to not hire minority workers, inframargin racist employers will experience lower proﬁts. In fact, if the conditions of perfect competition
were satisﬁed, discriminating employers would be wiped away and taste-based discrimination would disappear.1
This “taste-based” explanation for discrimination stands in contrast with what many
economists would view as a more disciplined explanation, which does not involve an ad
hoc (even if intuitive) addition to the utility function (animus toward certain groups) to
help rationalize a puzzling behavior. In a “statistical discrimination” model (Phelps, 1972;
Arrow, 1973; Aigner and Cain, 1977), the differential treatment of members of the minority group is due to imperfect information, and discrimination is the result of a signal
extraction problem. As a proﬁt-maximizing prospective employer, renter, or car
salesman, tries to infer the characteristics of a person that are relevant to the market transaction they are considering to complete with that person, they use all the information
available to them. When the person-speciﬁc information is limited, group-speciﬁc membership may provide additional valuable information about expected productivity. For
example, again using the labor market scenario, it may be known to employers that minority applicants are on average less productive than majority applicants. In this case, an
employer who sees two applicants with similar noisy but unbiased signals of productivity
should rationally favor the majority applicant to the minority one as her expected productivity is higher. While expected productivity will equal true productivity on average

1

Refusing to hire black people could be efﬁcient if the employer knows he cannot work well with them due to his
animus, but this does not take away from the fact that businesses that do this should not survive.

311

312

Handbook of Field Experiments

within each group, statistical discrimination will result in some minority workers being
treated less favorably than nonminority workers of the same true productivity, that is,
will result in discrimination as deﬁned previously. In the extreme case where individual
signals of productivity are totally uninformative, an employer may rationally decide to
make offers only to whites if the mean productivity among blacks does not exceed the
required threshold.
While taste-based discrimination is clearly inefﬁcient (simply consider how it constrains the allocation of talent), statistical discrimination is theoretically efﬁcient and,
hence, more easily defendable in ethical terms under the utilitarian argument. Moreover,
statistical discrimination can also be argued to be “fair” in that it treats identical people
with the same expected productivity (even if not with the same actual productivity)
and is not motivated by animus. In fact, many economists would most likely support
allowing statistical discrimination as a good policy, even where it is now illegal (as it is,
e.g., in the US labor market and real-estate market contexts).
Unfortunately, as we discuss in the following section, while ﬁeld experiments have
been overall successful at documenting that discrimination exists, they have (with a
few exceptions) struggled with linking the patterns of discrimination to a speciﬁc theory.
Meanwhile, psychologists have made considerable progress in their own understanding of the roots of discrimination, on a largely parallel track. The theories they have
advanced and the (mainly lab) experiments they have conducted have been helpful in
better nailing the microfoundations of discrimination. We believe this body of work blurs
the sharp line economists tend to draw between taste-based and statistical explanations.
Psychologists’ work on discrimination is embedded in an immense literature that attempts to understand the roots of prejudice, widely characterized as negative evaluation
of others made on the basis of their group membership. This literature has looked for the
microfoundations of such negative evaluation in a wide variety of areas, including personality development, socialization, social cognition, evolutionary psychology, and
neuroscience.
Early scholarship in psychology viewed prejudice as a form of abnormal thinking and
equated it to a psychopathology (think Adolf Hitler) that could be treated by addressing
the personality disorders of subset of the population that was “diseased.” It was only in the
second half of the 20th century that the prevalent view of prejudice among psychologists
became rooted in normal thinking processes (Dovidio, 2001), with socialization and
social norms being viewed as dominant drivers. Inﬂuential work by Tajfel (1970) and
Tajfel and Turner (1979) demonstrated the key role social identity plays in the process
underlying prejudice. Experimental evidence has shown that the assignment of people
to groups, even if totally arbitrary ones and even if they do not last, is sufﬁcient to produce favoritism for in-group members and negativity toward out-group members. At the
same time, evolutionary psychology has stressed the importance of social differentiation
and the delineation of clear group boundaries as a way to achieve the beneﬁts of

Field Experiments on Discrimination

cooperation between human beings without the risk of excessive costs, with group membership and group identity emerging as a form of contingent altruism (Brewer, 1981).
While in-group love might not necessarily imply out-group hate, the same factors that
make allegiance with group members important provide grounds for antagonism and
distrust of outsiders.
In addition, more recent advances in the psychology literature have demonstrated the
existence of unconscious, unintentional forms of bias. Modern social psychologists
believe that attitudes can occur in implicit modes and that people can behave in ways
that are unrelated or even sometimes opposed to their explicit views or self-interests
(Banaji and Greenwald, 1995; Bertrand et al., 2005; Dovidio et al., 1998a,b; Greenwald
and Banaji, 1995). Neuroscience studies have shown that different regions of the brain are
activated in conscious versus unconscious processing, suggesting that unconscious processes are distinct mental activities. For example, the unconscious processing of black
faces has been associated with activations of area of the brain associated with emotions
and fear while the conscious processing of the same faces increases brain activity in areas
related to control and regulation. Implicit biases are more likely to drive behavior under
conditions of ambiguity, high time pressures and cognitive loads, or inattentiveness to
the task.
Both of these dominant views of prejudice in the psychology literaturedas an evolutionary phenomenon making group membership an important component of one’s
social identity or as an unconscious automatic negative association triggered by exposure
to out-group membersdcould serve as microfoundations to what the more reduced
form “animus-based” models’ economists have worked with. More importantly, these
psychological models make clear that the limited information and decision-making
model that drives statistical discrimination might itself be endogenous to conscious or unconscious prejudice against the out-group members. If a social need to positively associate
with one’s own group also makes the out-group members feel more distant and unknowable (Brewer, 1988), an employer may not invest in collecting information on
an out-group member or decide that the individual signals of productivity for minority
group members are totally uninformative, resulting in all minority group members being
equally treated as unhirable. Limited de facto contact between in-group and out-group
members will imply that majority employees or coworkers will be fairly ignorant about
the quality of minorities; this would mean that employing, electing, or renting to them
may seem riskier which, in the presence of risk aversion, will also trigger more statistical
discrimination (Aigner and Cain, 1977). Unconscious bias may inﬂuence the speciﬁc
criteria or formulae that are used to assess expected productivity (Uhlmann and Cohen,
2005): for example, the sense of danger that is implicitly triggered by seeing a black face
or reading a black name on a resume may lead an employer to put too great a weight on
docility as a work quality than would be warranted for maximum productivity. Recently,
the emphasis on “ﬁt” between a prospective employee and the company as a hiring

313

314

Handbook of Field Experiments

criterion in technology jobs has raised the spectrum of a new form of subtle discrimination. Similarly, unconscious stereotypes may inﬂuence our judgment of the inputs
into productivity, with the same level of assertiveness being deemed as good for
productivity when coming from men but bad when coming from women (Rudman
and Glick, 2001).
Perhaps most importantly, whether discrimination is taste based or statistical, it may
ultimately result in genuine difference between groups, through self-fulﬁlling prophecies.
If the stereotypical woman is not good at math, talented girls may become discouraged
and ultimately not become good at math. If teachers or employers assume that students of
a particular color are less smart, they will invest less in them. Thus, discrimination,
whether it is taste based or statistical, can create or exacerbate existing differences between groups. Discrimination that starts as taste based and inefﬁcient can easily morph
into the more “justiﬁable” form. “Valid” stereotypes today could be the product of
ambient animus, very much complicating the division between the different theories
of discrimination.
The chapter proceeds as follows. Section 2 is devoted to the various experimental
methods that have been used in the ﬁeld to measure discrimination, in particular, audit
and correspondence studies. Audit studies send out individuals who are matched in all
observable characteristics except for the one in question (race, criminal record, etc.) to
apply for jobs or make purchases, then researchers analyze the responses. Correspondence
studiesdwhich represent by far the largest share of ﬁeld experiments on discriminationd
do the same but control for more variables by creating ﬁctitious applicants (often for jobs
or apartments) who correspond via mail. We summarize the ﬁndings of this body of work
(which clearly demonstrate the pervasiveness of discrimination) and discuss its key
limitations.
In this section of the chapter, we also discuss a few alternative methods to
measure discrimination, many of them having developed in the psychology literature
for use in the lab: Implicit Association Tests, Goldberg paradigm experiments, and
List Randomizationdas well as measures of willingness to pay to interact with
minority group members. We argue that these alternative methods deserve more
consideration by economists interested in measures of discrimination for their ﬁeld
research.
Section 3 reviews the work that addresses the costs of being discriminated against or
stereotyped. In particular, we review the experimental work that has studied how the
threat of being viewed through the lens of a negative stereotype can have a direct negative effect on performance. We also review the experimental literature on expectancy
effects, the goal of which has been to understand how stereotypes and biases against
minority groups may end up being self-fulﬁlling.
We round up the second part of the chapter by reviewing what is a surprisingly thin
ﬁeld-based literature on the costs (and beneﬁts) of the limited diversity in organizations

Field Experiments on Discrimination

and groups that directly result from discrimination. This allows us to discuss ﬁeld work that
has considered the consequences of discrimination not just from the perspective of the
group that is discriminated against but also from the perspective of society as a whole.
The third and ﬁnal section of this chapter, Section 4, is related to the review of various
interventions and policies that have been proposed to undo or weaken discrimination.
This section covers topics such as the impact of role models, how contact and exposure
to the minority groups may change prejudice, as well as a large psychology literature on
both sociocognitive and technological debiasing strategies. We argue that there is a lot of
promising future research that is “ripe for the picking” in this area, given the large
amount of theoretical and lab-based work that has not yet been taken to the ﬁeld.

2. MEASURING DISCRIMINATION IN THE FIELD
Earlier research on discrimination focused on individual-level outcome regressions, with
discrimination estimated from the “minority” differential that remains unexplained after
including as many proxies as possible for productivity.2
The limitations of this approach are well known. The interpretation of the estimated
“minority” coefﬁcient is problematic due to omitted variables bias. Speciﬁcally, results of
a regression analysis might suggest differential treatment by race or gender even if the decision maker (say, an employer) never used group membership in her decision of how
much to pay an employee. However, it could be the case that race or gender is correlated
with other proxies for productivity that are unobservable to the researcher but observed
by the employer. It is therefore impossible to conclude that the employer used group
membership in her decision-making process using this method.
The traditional answer has been to saturate the regression with as many productivityrelevant, individual-level characteristics as are available. But, of course, ensuring that the
researcher observes all that the decision maker observes is a hopeless task.
Moreover, adding more and more controls to a regression could ultimately obscure
the interpretation of the evidence. Consider the labor market context: minority workers
might be best responding to the discrimination they know to exist and could have simply
sorted into industries where there is no or limited discrimination. Hence, ﬁnding no
racial gap in earnings after controlling for industry or employer ﬁxed effects in a regression may indicate that there is no discrimination at the margin, which is very different
from no discrimination on average.
Also, as pointed out in the study by Guryan and Charles (2013), the variables the
researcher controls for might themselves be affected by discrimination. That is,
2

For a review of this earlier literature on the narrower topic of labor market discrimination, see Chapter 48 in the study
by Altonji and Blank (1999).

315

316

Handbook of Field Experiments

disadvantaged groups may not have access to high-quality schools because of discrimination, yet they might, given their low human capital accumulation, be paid the “fair market wage.” While one might still be tempted to conclude from this that there is no
discrimination in the labor market but instead discrimination in the education market,
that might not be right if the minority group’s expectations about labor market discrimination drive their educational decision. In other words, minority group members may
decide to underinvest in education if they expect that they will not be able to obtain labor
market returns for this education.
Audit and correspondence methodologies were developed to address these core limitations of the regression approach to measure discrimination. We review in the
following section both types of studies, discuss the extent to which they address these
limitations of the regression approach, and also consider new issues they create.

2.1 Audit studies
In the best-known collection of audit studies exploring the extent of discrimination, Fix
and Struyk (1993) describe the method as follows:
Two individuals (auditors or testers) are matched for all relevant personal characteristics other
than the one that is presumed to lead to discrimination, for example, race, ethnicity, gender.
They then apply for a job, a housing unit, or a mortgage, or begin to negotiate for a good or
service. The results they achieve and the treatment they receive in the transaction are closely
observed, documented, and analyzed to determine if the outcomes reveal patterns of differential
treatment on the basis of the trait studied and/or protected by antidiscrimination laws.

Discrimination is said to have been detected when “auditors in the protected class are
systematically treated worse than their teammates” (Yinger, 1998).3
A well-known early example of the audit method is offered by Ayres and Siegelman
(1995). In this study, pairs of testers (one of whom was always a white male) were trained
to bargain uniformly and then were sent to negotiate for the purchase of a new automobile at randomly selected Chicago-area dealerships. Thirty-eight testers bargained for 306
cars at 153 dealerships. Testers were chosen to have average attractiveness, and both testers in a pair bargained for the same model of car, at the same dealership, usually within a
few days of each other. Dealerships were selected randomly, testers were randomly
assigned to dealerships, and the choice of which tester in the pair would be the ﬁrst to
enter the dealership was also randomly made. The testers bargained at different dealerships for a total of nine car models, following a uniform bargaining script that instructed
them to focus quickly on one particular car and start negotiating over it. Testers were
3

Results from the earliest audit studies can be found in the study by Newman (1978), McIntyre et al. (1980), Galster
(1990), Yinger (1986), Cross et al. (1990), James and DelCastillo (1991), Turner et al. (1991), and Fix and Struyk
(1993).

Field Experiments on Discrimination

further instructed to tell dealers at the beginning of the bargaining that they could provide
their own ﬁnancing for the car. In spite of the identical approach to bargaining, Ayres and
Siegelman (1995) ﬁnd that white males are quoted lower prices than white women and
blacks (men or women). While ancillary evidence suggests that the dealerships’ disparate
treatment of women and blacks may be caused by dealers’ statistical inferences about consumers’ reservation prices, the data do not strongly support any single theory of
discrimination.
Another well-known audit study of the labor market is the study by Neumark et al.
(1996), which investigates the role of sex discrimination in vertical segregation
among waiters and waitresses. Speciﬁcally, two male and two female college students
were sent to apply in person for jobs as waiters and waitresses at 65 restaurants in Philadelphia. The restaurants were divided into high-, medium-, and low-price categories,
with the goal of estimating sex differences in the receipt of job offers in each price category. The study was designed so that a male and female pair applied for a job at each
restaurant and so that the male and female candidates were on average identical. The
ﬁndings are consistent with discrimination against women in high-price restaurants
and discrimination in women’s favor in low-price restaurants. Of the 13 job
offers from high-price restaurants, 11 were made to men. In contrast, of the 10 job offers from low-price restaurants, 8 were made to women. In addition, information
gathered from restaurants included in the study suggests that earnings are substantially
higher in high-price restaurants, meaning that the apparent hiring discrimination
has implications for gender-based differences in earnings among waitpersons.
Results are interpreted as consistent both with employer discrimination and customer
discrimination.
Another interesting application of the audit method is the study by Pager (2003) who
matched pairs of individuals applying for entry-level positions and probed the impact of a
criminal record, conditional on race. The author employed two black testers who formed
a team and another pair of white testers. Within each team, one auditor was “assigned” a
criminal record (this assignment was random and rotatingdi.e., each tester played the
role of an ex-convict at some point).4 In total, 350 employers were audited. The effect
of the criminal record was both statistically signiﬁcant and meaningful in magnitude: 17
percent of attempts with whites who had a supposed criminal record received a call back,
compared to 34 percent of tries with whites who said they had no criminal record. That
is, an equally qualiﬁed white candidate was about half as likely to receive a call back if he
was believed to be an ex-convict. For black applicants, the effect was notably larger: 5
percent of attempts with blacks who were supposedly ex-convicts received a call back,

4

Pager argues that “[b]y varying which member of the pair presented himself as having a criminal record, unobserved
differences within the pairs of applicants were effectively controlled for.”

317

318

Handbook of Field Experiments

compared to 14 percent of applications with blacks that had no record, meaning an
equally qualiﬁed black candidate was about one-third as likely to receive a call back if
he had a criminal record. Furthermore, these estimates show that a black applicant
without a criminal record was about as likely to receive a call back as a white applicant
with a criminal record.
Most audit studies do not explicitly test which theory of discrimination has most
explanatory power, even if they often informally discuss what forms of discrimination
might or might not be consistent with the observed patterns in the data. A notable exception is the study by List (2004) who recruited buyers and sellers at a sports cards market
and documented that minority buyers receive lower offers when they bargain for a
collectible card. One ﬁnding by List (2004) is that in this context lack of informationd
and the expectation that minorities are inexperiencedddrives discriminatory behavior.
Experienced dealers discriminate more. Among experienced buyers, ﬁnal offers to minorities are similar to offers received by white men; but minorities require more time
to achieve this outcome. Moreover, List tries to rule out taste-based explanations for
the data by combining the ﬁeld data with results from a dictator game conducted in
the lab with these card dealers. He ﬁnds that nonwhite males receive roughly as many
positive allocations in this game as white males and interprets this pattern as evidence
for the absence of taste for discrimination. Of course, while a laboratory experiment is
a useful complement to the ﬁeld study, the behavior of dealers in the dictator game,
on its own, does not prove that taste-based discrimination is absent during the actual market transactions.
2.1.1 Limitations of audit studies
Many of the weaknesses of audit studies have been discussed in Heckman and Siegelman
(1993) and Heckman (1998). First, these studies require that both members of the auditor
pair be identical in all dimensions that might affect productivity in employers’ eyes,
except for the trait that is being manipulated. To accomplish this, researchers typically
match auditors on several characteristics (height, weight, age, dialect, dressing style,
and hairdo) and train them for several days to coordinate interviewing styles. Yet, critics
note that this is unlikely to erase the numerous differences that exist between the auditors
in a pair.
Another weakness of the audit studies is that they are not double blind: auditors know
the purpose of the study. As Turner et al. (1991) note: “The ﬁrst day of training also
included an introduction to employment discrimination, equal employment opportunity, and a review of project design and methodology.” This may generate conscious
or subconscious motives among auditors to generate data consistent or inconsistent
with their beliefs about race or gender issues. As psychologists have documented, these
demand effects can be quite strong. It is very difﬁcult to insure that auditors will not
want to do “a good job.” Even a vague belief by auditors that employers treat minorities

Field Experiments on Discrimination

differently can result in measured differences in treatment. The possibility of such a demand effect is further magniﬁed by the fact that auditors are not in fact seeking jobs (or
trying to buy a car for themselves) and are therefore more free to let their beliefs affect the
bargaining or interview process.

2.2 Correspondence studies
Correspondence studies have been developed to address some of the more obvious
weaknesses of the audit method. Rather than relying on real auditors or testers that physically meet with a potential employer or potential landlord, correspondence studies rely
on ﬁctitious applicants. Speciﬁcally, in response to a job or rental advertisement, the
researcher sends (many) pairs of resumes or letters of interest, one of which is assigned
the perceived minority trait. Discrimination is estimated by comparing the outcomes
for the ﬁctitious applicants with and without the perceived minority trait. The most common (but not the only) way to manipulate the perceived minority trait has been through
the names of the applicants (e.g., female names, African-American names, Arabic Names,
etc.). Outcomes studied in a correspondence study have been mainly, but not exclusively, limited to measuring call backs by employers or landlords in response to the mailed
or emailed ﬁctitious application.5
The correspondence method presents several advantages over the audit method. First,
because it relies on resumes or applications by ﬁctitious people and not real people, one
can be sure to generate strict comparability across groups for all information that is seen by
the employers or landlords. This guarantees that any observed differences are caused
solely by the minority trait manipulation. Second, the use of paper applications insulates
from demand effects. Finally, because of the relatively low marginal cost, one can send
out a large number of applications. Besides providing more precise estimates, the larger
sample size also allows researchers to examine the nature of the differential treatment
from many more angles and hence promises to link it more closely to speciﬁc theories
of discrimination.6
Although Guryan and Charles (2013) call correspondence tests a “signiﬁcant methodological advance” and a review of discrimination in the marketplace published about
15 years ago discussed only observational and audit studies (Yinger, 1998), the method
is actually not that new. Fictitious applications and resumes have been sent to employers
in order to uncover racial or religious discrimination nearly half a century ago.7 However,
5
6

7

See Sections 2.3.2 and 2.3.3 for cases of different approaches.
We discuss in Section 2.5 other weaknesses that are shared by the correspondence studies, as well as added weaknesses
of the correspondence method compared to the audit method.
See Jowell and Prescott-Clarke (1970), Jolson (1974), Hubbuck and Carter (1980), Brown and Gay (1985), and Riach
and Rich (1991) for early studies. One caveat is that some of these studies fail to fully match skills between minority
and nonminority resumes.

319

320

Handbook of Field Experiments

the number of correspondence studies in economics has greatly increased following the
study by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), who study race discrimination in the labor
market by sending ﬁctitious resumes in response to help-wanted ads in Boston and Chicago newspapers. To manipulate perceived race, they randomly assigned very whitesounding names (such as Emily Walsh or Greg Baker) to half the resumes and very African-American-sounding names (such as Lakisha Washington or Jamal Jones) to the other
half. In total, they responded to over 1300 employment ads in the sales, administrative support, clerical, and customer services job categories and sent out nearly 5000 resumes. They
ﬁnd that white names receive 50 percent more call backs for interviews.
2.2.1 Correspondence studies in the labor market
The main results of labor market correspondence tests are reviewed in Table 1.
As is clear from Table 1, labor market correspondence studies have by now been carried in many countries around the world and have focused on a variety of perceived traits
that can be randomized on a resume. In the following, we review some of these studies in
more detail, focusing in particular on those that have attempted to go beyond simply
documenting whether or not differential treatment occurs based on the manipulated
traits and move toward understanding which theory may best ﬁt the patterns in the
data. However, one of our bottom lines will be that, unfortunately, the studies have
tended to be fairly close replications of the study by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004)
for different populations or contexts. With a few exceptions, the literature has failed
to push the correspondence methodology to design approaches to more formally test
for various theories of why differential treatment is taking place.
2.2.1.1 Race and ethnicity

Studies of labor market discrimination based on race and ethnic background have been
by far the most popular application of the correspondence method to date. While publication bias is always a concern, the results of correspondence studies where the trait of
interest is race or ethnicity offer overwhelming evidence of discrimination in the labor
market against racial and ethnic minorities. Evidence has been accumulated from nearly
all continents: Latin America (e.g., Galarza and Yamada (2014) compare whites to indigenous applicants in Peru), Asia (e.g., Maurer-Fazio (2012) compares Han, Mongolian,
and Tibetan applicants in China), Australia (e.g., where Booth et al. (2011) compare
whites to Chinese applicants), Europe (e.g., Baert et al. (2013) compare immigrants to
nonimmigrants in Belgium), Ireland (e.g., where McGinnity et al. (2009) compare candidates with Irish names to candidates with distinctively non-Irish names), etc.
Attempts to adapt the correspondence method to learn more about which theory of
discrimination best ﬁts the patterns in the data have been mainly focused on trying to provide corroborative evidence for (or against) statistical discrimination. The most common
approach has been to investigate whether the gap in call backs is responsive to the amount

Table 1 Labor market correspondence studies
Paper
Country

CVs / apps

Vacancies

Effect (call-back ratio)

Theory

Peru

4820

1205

No

Sweden

8466

-

White-to-indigenous ratio: 1.8
Low attractiveness hurts white
females
Employed to long-term
unemployed: 1.25

Netherlands

636

-

No

Nunley et al. (2014)
Trait: Race

United States

9396

-

Dutch-to-foreign: 1.62
(unconditional ratio). No
difference, if views held
ﬁxed
White-to-black: 1.18
(unconditional)

Ghayad (2013)
Trait: Unemployment
duration
Bartos et al. (2013)

United States

3360

600

Employed-to-unemployed:
1.47

Czech
Republic
and
Germany

274
(Czech
R.)
745 (Ger.)

-

Czech-to-Vietnamese: 1.34

United States

6400

1600

Lower requests for CVs if
candidate is Turkish
White-to-Muslim: 1.58

United States
(largest
100
MSAs)

12,054

3040

Galarza and Yamada (2014)
Trait: Ethnicity;
attractiveness
Eriksson and Rooth (2014)
Trait: Unemployment
duration
Blommaert et al. (2014)
Trait: Arabic name

Kroft et al. (2013)
Trait: Unemployment
duration

Consistent with attention
discrimination

Consistent with
theoretical models of
secularization and
cultural distate theory
No

Continued

321

1 log point change in
unemployment duration: 4.7
percentage points lower callback probability

Inconsistent with
statistical
discrimination,
consistent with tastebased discrimination
No

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Trait: Ethnicity (Roma,
Asian, Turkish)
Wright et al. (2013)
Trait: Religion/ethnicity

No

322

Baert et al. (2013)
Trait: Nationality
(Turkish-sounding
name)
Bailey et al. (2013)
Trait: Sexual orientation
Ahmed et al. (2013)

Vacancies

Effect (call-back ratio)

Theory

Belgium

752

376

Flemish-to-Turkish: 1.03 to
2.05, depending on the
occupation

No

United States

4608

1536

No effect

No

Sweden

3990

-

No

United States

4183

-

Heterosexual-to-homosexual
(male): 1.14
Heterosexual-to-homosexual
(female): 1.22
Christian-to-Muslim: 1.16

Italy

2320

-

Heterosexual-to-Homosexual:
1.38

No

Germany

1056

528

Consistent with statistical
discrimination

China

21,592

10,796

United States

330

990

German-to-Turkish: 1.29 (if
no reference letter is
included)
Han-to-Mongolian: 1.36
Han-to-Tibetan: 2.21
English-to-foreign names: 1.41

Sweden

466

-

Canada

12,910

3225

Sweden

3228

1614

Australia

Above
4000

-

Trait: Sexual orientation
Acquisti and Fong (2013)
Traits:Sexual orientation
and religion
Patacchini et al. (2012)
Traits: Sexual orientation
and attractiveness
Kaas and Manger (2012)
Trait: Immigrant (race/
ethnicity)
Maurer-Fazio (2012)
Trait: Ethnicity
Jacquemet and Yannelis
(2012)
Trait: Race/nationality
Ahmed et al. (2012)
Trait: Age
Oreopoulos (2011)
Trait: Nationality (and race)

Carlsson (2011)
Trait: Gender
Booth et al. (2011)
Trait: Ethnicity

English-to-Black names: 1.46
31-year old to 46-year old:
3.23
English name-to-Immigrant:
ranged from 1.39 to 2.71
(against Indian Pakistani and
Chinese applicants)
Female-to-male: 1.07
White-to-Italian: 1.12
White-to-Chinese: 1.68

No

No
Consistent with patterns
of ethnic homophily
No
No

No
No

Handbook of Field Experiments

Table 1 Labor market correspondence studiesdcont'd
Paper
Country
CVs / apps

Booth and Leigh (2010)
Trait: Gender
Riach and Rich (2010)
Trait: Age
Rooth (2009)
Trait: Attractiveness/
obesity

3365

-

United
Kingdom
Sweden

1000þ

-

1970

985

McGinnity et al. (2009)
Trait: Nationality/race

Ireland

480

240

Banerjee et al. (2009)
Traits: Caste and religion

India

3160

371

Lahey (2008)
Trait: Age
Petit (2007)
Traits: Age, gender,
number of children
Bursell (2007)
Trait: Ethnicity
Bertrand and Mullainathan
(2004)
Trait: Race
Jolson (1974)
Trait: Race and religion

United States

App. 4000

-

France

942

157

Sweden

3552

1776

United States

4870

1300þ

United States

300

-

MSAs; Metropolitan Statistical Areas.

Female-to-male: 1.28 (femaledominated professions)
2.64 favoring younger
candidates
Nonobese/attractive-toobese/unattractive: ranged
from 1.21 to 1.25 (but
higher for some occupations)
1.8, 2.07, 2.44 in favor of Irish
and against Asians, Germans,
and Africans, respectively
Upper caste-to-other
backward castes: 1.08
(software jobs, insigniﬁcant),
1.6 (call-center jobs)
Young-to-older: 1.42
Ranged from 1.13 to 2.43
against 25-year old, childless
women
Swedish-to-foreign names:
1.82
White-to-African-American:
1.5 (1.22 for females in sales
jobs)
White-to-black: 4.2 for selling
positions

No
No
No

No

No

No
No

Inconsistent with
statistical discrimination
No

No

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Australia

323

324

Handbook of Field Experiments

of information provided to employers about the job applicants, as was ﬁrst done in the
study by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), in which they studied how credentials affect
the racial gap in call back. In particular, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) experimentally
varied the quality of the resume used in response to a given ad. Higher quality applicants
had on average a little more labor market experience and fewer holes in their employment history; they were also more likely to have an email address, have completed
some certiﬁcation degree, possess foreign language skills, or have been awarded some
honors. The authors sent four resumes in response to each ad: two higher quality and
two lower quality ones. They randomly assigned an African-American-sounding name
to one of the higher and one of the lower quality resumes. They ﬁnd that whites with
higher quality resumes receive nearly 30 percent more call backs than whites with lower
quality resumes. On the other hand, having a higher quality resume has a smaller effect
for African-Americans. In other words, the gap between whites and African-Americans
widens with resume quality. While one may have expected improved credentials to alleviate employers’ fear that African-American applicants are deﬁcient in some unobservable
skills under a statistical discrimination explanation for the overall discrimination, this was
not the case in their data. Bertrand and Mullainathan argue that one simple alternative
model that may best explain the patterns in their data is some form of lexicographic search
by employers:
Employers receive so many resumes that they may use quick heuristics in reading these resumes.
One such heuristic could be to simply read no further when they see an African-American name.
Thus, they may never see the skills of African-American candidates and this could explain why
these skills are not rewarded.

These ﬁndings are replicated in the study by Nunley et al. (2014): blacks received 14
percent fewer call backs compared to whites, and discrimination was not mitigated
when productive characteristics were added to a resume. However, some studies report
results that are more in line with the predictions of statistical discrimination models. Oreopoulos (2011) submitted 12,910 resumes in response to 3225 job postings in Canada. First,
he compares (ﬁctitious) applicants who had a foreign name but who attended a Canadian
(or foreign) university and had work experience in Canada. The call-back rate is 1.39 for
Canadian (English-sounding names) versus foreigners if they went to a Canadian
university and 1.43 if they went to a foreign university. However, the call-back rate falls
dramatically if the foreigners’ job experience was purely international (2.71 call-back ratio).
Moreover, if candidates who had foreign job experience and education had a Chinese last
name with an English ﬁrst name (Allen and Michelle Wang), their prospects on the job
market improved. This raises the possibility that a fraction of the “discrimination” is statistical, for example, with employers making inference about the candidate’s English skills.
Perhaps even more striking, Kaas and Manger (2012) sent out 528 pairs of applications
in Germany to study the effect of a Turkish-sounding name. The German-to-Turkish

Field Experiments on Discrimination

call-back rate was 1.29 when no reference letter was included. Discrimination was eliminated when a reference letter, containing indirect information about productivity (such
as conscientiousness and agreeableness) was added, which the authors interpret as evidence
of consistency with statistical discrimination. It is interesting that such “soft information”
presented in the reference letter appears to remove the difference in call-back rates even
though “harder information” presented in a resume (such as employment history or
honors) does not in other studies. It would be interesting to probe this contrast further.
2.2.1.2 Gender

There are fewer studies on gender, and discrimination against women at the call-back
stage is much less apparent in general. Some studies attempt to show whether the degree
(and nature) of discrimination depends on the nature of the profession. Carlsson (2011)
sent paired applications for positions of IT professionals, drivers, construction workers,
sales assistants, high school teachers, restaurant workers, accountants, cleaners, preschool
teachers, and nurses. Overall, women are called back slightly more often than men; in
male-dominated professions, males have a slight (insigniﬁcant) advantage. Booth and
Leigh (2010) focused on female-dominated professions (waitstaff, data entry, customer
service, and sales jobs) and found a call back of 1.28 in favor of women.
A topic of interest for future work would be to apply the correspondence method to
measure the extent to which a bias exists against women with children or against young
women who may have children in the future. To our knowledge, only one study, Petit
(2007), studies this aspect. In order to shed light on the role of family constraints in gender
discrimination, Petit sent resumes for male and female applicants, with or without children,
of age 25 or 37. Discrimination against women is detected for young workers in higher
skilled positions (in the French ﬁnance industry) but not among prime-age workers.
2.2.1.3 Caste and religion

Banerjee et al. (2009) study the role of caste and religion in India’s software and callcenter sectors. They sent 3160 ﬁctitious resumes with randomly allocated caste-linked
surnames in response to 371 job openings in and around Delhi (India) that were advertised in major city papers and online job sites. They ﬁnd no evidence of discrimination
against noneupper-caste (i.e., Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, and other backward
castes) applicants for software jobs. But, in the case of call-center jobs, they do ﬁnd larger
and signiﬁcant differences between call-back rates for upper castes and other backward
castes (and to a lesser extent Scheduled Castes) in favor of upper castes. They ﬁnd no
discrimination against Muslims.

325

326

Handbook of Field Experiments

The potential impact of religion on job prospects in the United States is explored by
Wright et al. (2013). Afﬁliation with a religion was signaled through student activities
that were listed on resumes.8 The control group had no religious identiﬁcation in his/
her resume. Compared to the control group, Muslim applications were 24 percent less
likely to receive at least one contact by either email or phone, and they received 33
percent fewer total contacts than did those from the control group.
2.2.1.4 Unemployment spells

More recently, researchers have applied the correspondence model to better understand patterns of labor market discrimination against the unemployed. In Sweden, Eriksson and
Rooth (2014) randomly assigned various characteristics (contemporary unemployment,
past unemployment immediately after graduation, past unemployment between jobs,
work experience, and number of employers). Long-term unemployment did not harm
job candidates’ chances, as long as the applicant had subsequent work experience. However, if the applicant was unemployed in the preceding 9 months, his or her call-back
probability fell by 20 percent.9 In the United States, Ghayad (2013) ﬁnds that (current) unemployment spell longer than 6 months are particularly harmful: the rate of interview requests for resumes with similar ﬁrm experience drops 1.13 percentage points for each
additional month of nonemployment up to 6 months, and once the candidate experienced
6 months of unemployment, interview requests fell by an extra 8 percentage points.
Kroft et al. (2013) relate these results to the inference problem faced by the prospective employers. The authors replicate the result that longer employment duration reduces
call-back rate but also show that this depends on the labor market conditions. Duration
dependence is stronger in tight labor markets, suggesting that employers use the information on the length of unemployment as a signal of productivity but recognize that the
signal is less informative when the labor markets conditions are weak.10
2.2.1.5 Other characteristics: sexual orientation and age

Resume studies are now also being used to try to detect discrimination in a number of less
obvious domains.
A literature has tried to estimate discrimination against Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT) candidates; however, most studies have focused only on lesbians
8

9

10

It is tricky to signal only religion on a resume. The manipulation through student activities may reveal more than just
religion, an issue we will come back to in Section 2.4.
One caveat, as the authors acknowledge, is that not all employers necessarily view the gaps on the CVs as implying
unemployment.
This may also explain the ﬁnding in the study by Eriksson and Rooth (2014) (mentioned previously) since that
particular study was carried out between March and November 2007, that is, during the global ﬁnancial crisis.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

and gay men.11 One of the challenges with estimating discrimination against LGBT candidates is how to provide information that identiﬁes a candidate as a member of that minority, when telling such details are not normally solicited in job applications. In the
study by Ahmed et al. (2013), which was carried out in Sweden, sexual orientation
was indicated by the mention of a “spouse” of either gender in the cover letter and
voluntary work in either an LGBT rights organization (gay identity) or the Swedish
red cross (heterosexual identity). Targeted occupations included male-dominated ones
(construction worker, motor vehicle driver, sales person, and mechanic worker), female-dominated ones (shop sales assistant, preschool teacher, cleaner, restaurant worker,
and nurse), and more neutral ones (high school teacher). The authors ﬁnd some mild evidence of discrimination (ratio of 1.14), which ultimately could be due to the nature of
the signaling (e.g., working in LGBT rights, as opposed to the red cross, may be seen as a
political gesture, not just revealing an identity). In Italy, Patacchini et al. (2012) performed a correspondence study that revealed “homosexual preferences” through internships in pro-gay advocacy groups and ﬁnds higher discrimination against gay men (1.38)
but not lesbian candidates. In the United States, Bailey et al. (2013) ﬁnd no evidence of
discrimination against gay men or lesbians candidates.
The issue of discrimination by age has also attracted some attention, and several papers
(Ahmed et al., 2012; Lahey, 2008; Riach and Rich, 2010) ﬁnd that younger candidates
are generally preferred to older ones. A fundamental issue with this work is that it is hard
to argue that age is not necessarily a proxy for productivity. Lahey (2008) tries to control
for physical ﬁtness with hobbies (e.g., racquetball is supposed to indicate ﬁtness), but this
is ultimately only moderately convincing.
Finally, physical appearance has also been studied: Rooth (2009) studies obesity in the
Swedish labor market and Patacchini et al. (2012) investigate the beauty premium in
Italy. Using manipulated facial photos to show an otherwise identical candidate as obese,
Rooth (2009) shows there is a signiﬁcantly lower call-back response for obese people:
obese men had a six percentage points lower call-back rate, while the call-back rate
for obese women was eight percentage points lower. Patacchini et al. (2012) ﬁnd a small,
but signiﬁcant, beauty premium for “pretty” females (2 percent); however, they do not
ﬁnd a beauty premium for men. Interestingly, the beauty premium disappears for highskilled attractive women: low-skilled attractive women are more likely to be called back
than high-skilled attractive women. On the other hand, Hamermesh and Biddle (1994)
do ﬁnd the existence of a beauty premium in the United States. We discuss the rationale
for a beauty premium further in Section 2.9.

11

To the best of our knowledge, no study has been done that speciﬁcally looks at discrimination against transgender
people using the correspondence method.

327

328

Handbook of Field Experiments

2.3 Correspondence studies in other settings
2.3.1 Rental markets
Correspondence studies in the housing market have very much followed the same
approach as those in the labor market. The main ﬁndings from the literature are summarized in Table 2.
The rental market studies replicate, in methodology and basic results, those in the
labor market. The researchers typically identify rental ads and send inquiries, manipulating the trait of interest. Discrimination against Arabic names is found in Sweden
(Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014; Ahmed and Hammarstedt, 2008; Ahmed et al., 2010).
Discrimination against blacks and other minority ethnicities in the United States is found
in the study by Ewens et al. (2014), Hanson and Hawley (2011), and Carpusor and Loges
(2006). Discrimination against immigrants (particularly Muslims) is found in Italy (Baldini
and Federici, 2011) and Spain (Bosch et al., 2010). Discrimination against LGBT people
is found in Ahmed and Hammarstedt (2009).
Another popular variation, parallel to the labor market literature, has been to provide
more information (e.g., job, etc.) about some of the applicants. Positive information (e.g.,
“I do not smoke and I work full time as an architect”) tends to reduce the call-back ratios
between white and the minority group, while negative information (“I am a smoker and
I have a less than perfect credit score”) or small spelling mistakes in the email tend to increase it.
2.3.2 Retail
The expansion of online platforms allows researchers to use the correspondence method
to also study discrimination in retail markets. There are currently much fewer such
studies, but the door is wide open for more to be performed.
Zussman (2013) studies the mechanisms behind ethnic discrimination in the online
market for used cars in Israel. This paper uses an innovative, two-stage approach. First,
about 8000 paired emails are sent to sellers of second-hand cars. An enquiry coming
from somebody with a Jewish-sounding name was 22 percent more likely to receive a
response than an enquiry emailed by an interested buyer with an Arab-sounding
name. Second, a follow-up phone survey was used to elicit sellers’ attitudes about minorities to tease out potential mechanisms for this effect. The researchers found that Jewish
car sellers who strongly disagree with the statement that “the Arabs in Israel are more
likely to cheat than the Jews” do not discriminate against the Arab buyer, while others
sellers do. That is, expectations about the quality of the transactions are correlated to
the differential (average) treatment of Arabs.
Pope and Sydnor (2011) reports evidence from peer-to-peer lending sites. They
ﬁnd that loan listings with an attached picture of a black individual are 25e35
percent less likely to receive funding than those of white individuals with similar credit
proﬁles.

Table 2 Rental market papers
Study

Country

Inquiries

Effect

Theory

Carlsson and Eriksson
(2014)
Trait: Minority status
(Arabic name)
Ewens et al. (2014)
Trait: Race

Sweden

5827

Swedish-to-Arabic (females): 1.37

No

United States

14,237

White-to-black: 1.19

Bartos et al. (2013)
Trait: Minority status
(Roma or Asian name)
Hanson and Hawley (2011)
Trait: Race

Czech Republic and
Germany

1800

United States

9456

Baldini and Federici (2011)
Trait: Immigrant status;
Language ability
Ahmed et al. (2010)
Trait: Minority status
(Arabic name)
Bosch et al. (2010)
Trait: Immigrant status

Italy

3676

Czech-to-minority: 1.27 (site
available), 1.9 (pooled Asian and
Roma names)
White-to-African-American: 1.12
(varied by neighborhood and
unit type)
Italian-to-East European: 1.24
Italian-to-Arab: 1.48

Sweden

1032

Spain

1809

Ahmed and Hammarstedt
(2009)
Trait: Sexual orientation
Ahmed and Hammarstedt
(2008)
Trait: Immigrant (race/
ethnicity/religion)
Carpusor and Loges (2006)
Trait: Race/ethnicity (Arab,
African-American)

Sweden

Swedish-to-Arabic (males): 1.62
Consistent with statistical
discrimination,
inconsistent with tastebased discrimination
Consistent with attention
discrimination
Consistent with statistical
discrimination
No

408

Swedish-to-Arab/Muslim: 1.44
(no information), 1.24 (detailed
information about the applicant)
Spanish-to-Moroccan: 1.44 (no
information), 1.19 (with positive
information)
Straight-to-gay: 1.27

No

No

Sweden

1500

Swedish-to-Arab male: 2.17

No

United States
(Los Angeles
County)

1115

White-to-Arab: 1.35
White-to-black: 1.59, conditional
on hearing back, 1.98
unconditional

No

No
Field Experiments on Discrimination

329

330

Handbook of Field Experiments

2.3.3 Academia
Milkman et al. (2012) ran a ﬁeld experiment set in academia with a sample of 6548 professors. Faculty members received emails from ﬁctional prospective doctoral students
seeking to schedule a meeting either that day or in 1 week; students’ names signaled their
race (Caucasian, African-American, Hispanic, Indian, or Chinese) and gender. When the
requests were to meet in 1 week, Caucasian males were granted access to faculty members 26 percent more often than were women and minorities; also, compared with
women and minorities, Caucasian males received more and faster responses. However,
these patterns were essentially eliminated when prospective students requested a meeting
that same day. The authors argue that their ﬁnding of a temporal discrimination effect is
consistent with the idea in psychology that subtle contextual shifts can alter patterns of
race- and gender-based discrimination (a topic we return to in the last section of this
chapter, Section 4.4).

sume
s
2.4 Beyond the re
With the rise of the Internet, employers can easily ﬁnd more information online about a
job applicant besides his or her resume. A few recent studies enrich the correspondence
methodology by allowing employers to search for more (and different) information than
that which would typically be available in a resume.
Given the increasing popularity of online social networks, the contribution of
Acquisti and Fong (2013) is particularly interesting. They employ the correspondence
method by submitting applications to job postings and extend their experiments by
creating either personal websites of social networking proﬁles for the ﬁctitious applicants, which allow employers to gather additional information if they wish to. The
additional information that can be gleaned online about the job applicants relates to
their religion and sexual orientation. The question the paper is asking is whether extra
information available online but not on the resume leads to discrimination: Would
applicants whose identity is not revealed in the application but who appear to be
Muslim (vs. Christian) or gay (vs. straight) on a popular social network, suffer unequal
treatment?
To do so, they created distinct online proﬁles: one proﬁle on a professional network
site, and another proﬁle on a social network site where the emphasis is on sharing photographs or leisure-related comments, not job opportunities. The proﬁle on the professional network site was identical across treatments (even the photograph was the same).
The name used by researchers (selected after careful testing) was one not commonly associated with a particular race or religion. That is, the name of the “Muslim candidate” was
non-Arabic, but the candidate’s religion could be inferred after some search on the social
network site. Only the proﬁle on the social network site contained clues (e.g., Christian
vs. Muslim or straight vs. gay).

Field Experiments on Discrimination

The experiment ﬁnds that only a small fraction of employers use social media to
conduct additional inquiry about job candidates.12 Given the limited search efforts by
employers, the effects of group membership are generally small. The total effect of trait
manipulation is not statistically signiﬁcant: 12.6 percent of applicants who appeared to be
Christians received call backs, compared to 10.9 percent of candidates who appeared to
be Muslims. About 10.6 percent of candidates who appeared to be straight males received
call backs, and the share of call backs for seemingly gay males was nearly identical.
The strength of this type of study is that researchers are able to study more naturally
the impact of traits that traditionally are not revealed on a resume. While some correspondence tests have tried to signal religious afﬁliation or sexual orientation through
“extracurricular activities” described on CVs, this type of disclosure might reveal more
than religion or sexual identity: the employers might be reacting to someone’s activism
regarding their religion or sexuality, not their religion or sexuality per se.
While Acquisti and Fong (2013) focus on the impact of gay status for males and religion, their methods could be used to study the effect of other interesting and until now
mostly unexplored characteristics. For example, would the size of a candidate’s network
have an effect? Would employers infer that a “popular” candidate has valuable social
skills? Would attractive-seeming candidates receive more call backs, or would attempts
to “choreograph” one’s online presence be viewed as an undesirable trait? Would candidates who reveal their family status be treated differently than candidates who are
more private? Clearly, online ﬁeld experiments offer a rich landscape for studying
“what employers want.”

2.5 Limitations of correspondence studies
While correspondence studies address some key weaknesses of the audit methodology,
they share other weaknesses with audit studies and have some unique limitations of their
own.
Both types of studies can only inform us about the average differences in hiring
behavior. But, we generally think that applicants care about the marginal response.
Real job seekers are likely to adjust their behavior during the search process in a strategic
manner: in other words, they will not apply for positions in a random fashion. So, while
informative about discrimination on average in a given setting, correspondence and audit
studies are not informative about discrimination at the margin, when real job seekers have
fully optimized their job search strategy to the realities of the workforce. This is related to
a criticism raised by Heckman and Siegelman in their contribution to “Clear and
12

Measuring the exact number of visits to a social or professional networking proﬁle is not possible for several reasons.
However, using Google Adwords “Keyword Tool” statistics and Professional Network “Premiere” account statistics,
the authors estimate that at most one-third of the employers tried to access the proﬁle of the candidates.

331

332

Handbook of Field Experiments

Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in America” when they challenge the use of newspaper advertisements in audit studies, referring to previous ﬁndings
that most jobs are found through direct contact with a ﬁrm or via informal channels like
family and friends:
[C]ollege students masqueraded as blue collar workers seeking entry-level jobs. Apart from the
ethical issues involved, this raises the potentially important problem that the Urban Institute
actors may not experience what actually occurs in the these labor markets among real
participants (Fix and Struyk, 1993).

Another drawback of ﬁeld studies (both audit and correspondence) is that ﬁctitious
applicants typically only apply to entry-level jobs. There are a few exceptions, and
some of the studies we describe previously use applications to skilled and experienced positions. But the bottom line is that many jobs are never advertised, and the extent of
discrimination in the workplace overall may be quite different from the discrimination
that is measured at the entry point in the labor market.
Yet another limitation of ﬁeld studies (both audit and correspondence) is that the
outcome variables that can be studied are typically very coarse. In fact, in this regard, the correspondence studies are inferior to the audit studies. Most of the time, interview invitations
or rental offers (“call-back rates”) are the only outcomes captured by ﬁeld experiments (one
exception being Doleac and Stein, 2013, who were able to track transactionsdsales of
iPods through local online marketsdall the way to completion). Obviously, because there
is no real applicant, the correspondence study methodology cannot be taken to the interview stage, job-offer stage, or wage-setting stagedor to the stage at which people sign a
lease on an apartment. Theoretically, all of this can be measured when auditors are used.
However, even audit studies do not allow one to track other important outcomes, such as
work hours, working conditions, or promotions. The binary outcome in the typical correspondence studies (call back or not) raises important issues about how to conduct some of
the analysis. What should be inferred about discrimination for the employers that do not
call back any of the ﬁctitious applicants? Is that evidence of “symmetric treatment”? Riach
and Rich (2002) argue that if both the majority and minority candidate are rejected, that
does not constitute evidence of equal treatment. Only with more continuous outcome
variablesdones that typically are not available to the researcher, such as the ranking of
the job candidates by the employerdwould it be possible to resolve this tension.
Both correspondence and audit studies have also raised ethical concerns. Employers’
time is bound to be a scarce resource, and researchers who carry out these studies are using it without the involved parties’ consent. A positive take on this ethical issue is the
study by List (2009) who argues that “[w]hen the research makes participants better
off, beneﬁts society, and confers anonymity and just treatment to all subjects, the lack
of informed consent seems defensible.” However, many people outside the scientiﬁc
community would probably disagree (In fact, List (2009) refers to experiments where

Field Experiments on Discrimination

subjects are compensated; in the case of correspondence tests, we did not come across
experiments where employers were actually compensated for their time.).13
Another underappreciated ethical issue is that when the “applicant” declines an offer,
things other than the anticipated consumption of the employer’s attention can occur.
The employer may “learn” (become convinced) that applicants with the attributes similar
to those of the ﬁctitious candidate are unlikely to accept offers. If this really happens, it is
possible that some real job applicants will be treated differently (possibly less favorably)
due to prior communication with the researcher pretending to be a job candidate. But
it is also possible that after observing a rejection or two from ﬁctitious candidates, an
employer may end up having the impression that the market is tighter than he or she
thought; screening could then become less intense, which might be beneﬁcial for real
jobless candidates (but potentially detrimental for the employers).14
A subtler criticism of the correspondence and audit methods by Heckman and
Siegelman (1993) has been recently revisited by Neumark (2012). Heckman and
Siegelman (1993) show that a troubling result emerges in audit or correspondence studies
because the outcome of interest is not linear in productivity (as it might be for a wage
offer) but instead is nonlinear. That is, we think that in the hiring process ﬁrms evaluate
a job applicant’s productivity relative to a standard and offer the applicant a job (or a callback) if the standard is met. This nonlinear relationship can raise issues for any inferences
of discrimination based on call backs if employers believe that blacks and whites differ in
the variance of their unobserved productivity.
Consider, for example, the case where employers believe that the variance of unobserved productivity is higher for whites than for blacks. The correspondence and audit
methods make black and white applicants equal on observable productivity characteristic
X1 . However, no information is conveyed on a second, unobservable productivityrelated characteristic, X2 . Because an employer will offer a job interview only if it
perceives or expects the sum b1 X1 þ X2 to be sufﬁciently high, when X1 is set at a
low level the employer has to believe that X2 is high (or likely to be high) in order to
offer an interview. Even though the employer does not observe X2 , if the employer
knows that the variance of X2 is higher for whites, the employer correctly concludes

13

14

The method of correspondence studies has also been taken to the dating market (e.g., Ong and Wang, 2015). We do
not review these contributions here because it is a bit difﬁcult to talk about discrimination when referring to the
choice of whom to date, but the ethical dilemma of putting fake applications on a dating website also seems
particularly acute. As a conceptual aside, it is also not at all clear that one needs to create a ﬁctitious proﬁle on dating
websites, as it is already possible for the researchers to observe exactly the same information that the user has when
making a decision. There is thus no “unobserved” variable biasing the analysis and no information to be gained from
ﬁctitious resumes. The exercise can be performed with observational data (Fisman et al., 2008; Hitsch et al., 2010;
Banerjee et al., 2009). This makes the ethical concern particularly salient.
This particular issue can be at least partially addressed by debrieﬁng employers ex-post about them having been part
of a research study.

333

334

Handbook of Field Experiments

that whites are more likely than blacks to have a sufﬁciently high sum of b1 X1 þ X2 , by
virtue of the simple fact that fewer blacks have very high values of X2 . Employers will
therefore be less likely to offer jobs to blacks than to whites, even though the observed
average of X1 is the same for blacks and whites, as is the unobserved average of X2 . The
opposite holds if X1 is set at a high value: in this case, the employer only needs to avoid
very low values of X2 , which will be more common for the higher variance whites. In
other words, Heckman and Siegelman (1993) show that, even when there are equal
group averages of both observed and unobserved variables, an audit or correspondence
study can generate biased estimates, with spurious evidence of discrimination in either
direction or spurious evidence of its absence.
Building constructively on this criticism, Neumark (2012) shows that if a correspondence study includes variation in observable measures of applicants’ quality that affect hiring outcomes, an unbiased estimate of discrimination can be recovered even when there
are group differences in the variances of the unobservables. Neumark explains how his
method can be easily implemented in any future correspondence study. All that is needed
is for the resumes or applicants to include some variation in characteristics that affect the
probability of being hired.15
Finally, it is remarkable that after literally dozens of correspondence studies, there has
been only limited reﬁnement of the methodology to help discriminate between different
theories of the differential treatment that is being consistently observed. Employers must
try their best to infer future productivity of a candidate based on limited information.
That is, applicants who belong to different groups may experience different treatment
even if discrimination, as understood by Becker (differential treatment is motivated by
prejudice), is absent and only statistical discrimination is at play. Attributes beyond those
intended by the researcher may be inferred by the recipient. For example, Fryer and
Levitt (2004) suggest that black names may “provide a useful signal to employers about
labor market productivity after controlling for information on the resume.” This is clearly
true for age, as we noted, but this may also be true for race if the choice of a black name is
a political statement by the parent, accompanied by a different attitude toward schooling
and obedience. More broadly, as we already mentioned several times, even if in general
employers do not see a particular identity as a sign of lower productivity (or want to
discriminate based on it), they may infer something from the fact that the person is wearing it on their sleeves. After all, there was no difference in call-back rate according to

15

The method rests on three types of assumptions. First, it is based on an assumed binary threshold model of hiring that
asks whether the perceived productivity of a worker exceeds a standard. Second, it imposes a parametric assumption
about the distribution of unobservables. Finally, it relies on an additional identifying assumption that some applicant
characteristics affect the perceived productivity of workers, and hence hiring, and that the effects of these characteristics on perceived productivity does not vary with group membership.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

either religion or sexuality when the information was available to the employer
online but not directly reported in the resume (Acquisti and Fong, 2013).
The only approach that has been used repeatedly by researchers to try to separate
statistical from taste-based discrimination has been to compare differential gaps in outcomes between pairs of minority and nonminority applicants with weaker or stronger
productivity attributes on their resumes or applications. As more productivity-relevant
information is included on the resume, average differences in unobservable characteristics
between the minority and nonminority applicants are reduced, and statistical discrimination should also be reduced; however, it is clear that this remains a very indirect way to try
to isolate taste-based discrimination among employers or landlords.
In this regard, a recent paper that breaks the mold of the typical correspondence study
and deserves particular attention is the study by Bartos et al. (2013). This paper is remarkable in its ability to push the correspondence study methodology forward, think beyond
the pure call-back data, and reﬁne our theories of discrimination.
The paper links two important ideas: attention is a scarce resource, and lack of information about individual candidates drives discrimination in selection decisionsd or, in
other words, statistical discrimination is an important factor in selection decisions. While
the existing models of statistical discrimination implicitly assume that individuals are fully
attentive to available information, the paper develops and tests a model in which knowledge of minority status impacts the level of attention to information about an individual
and how the resulting asymmetry in acquired information across groupsddenoted
“attention discrimination”dcan lead to discrimination. In particular, the authors argue
that in markets where only a small share of applicants is considered above the bar for selection, such as the labor market, negative stereotypes are predicted to lower attention.
On the other hand, the effect is opposite in markets where most applicants are selected,
such as the rental housing market.
Bartos et al. (2013) test for such “attention discrimination” in two ﬁeld experiments:
one in the labor market and one in the rental market, where they can monitor the decision maker’s information acquisition about applicants through visits to hyperlinks containing resumes and personal websites (respectively). They created personal websites for
ﬁctitious applicants and submitted rental applications in the Czech Republic and job applications in both Germany and the Czech Republic. The advantage of using hyperlinks
to resumes and personal sites is that the researchers were able to track the exact number of
visitors to the personal proﬁle and, therefore, the share of landlords and employers who
allocated additional attention to an applicant. Hence, the study was able to assess whether
a minority-sounding name (1) leads to differential call backs and (2) causes less or more
search.
Like the prior literature, Bartos et al. (2013) ﬁnd evidence of discrimination against
minority applicants in both the housing and labor markets. Most interesting, though,
are their ﬁndings regarding attention allocation. In the labor markets, in both Germany

335

336

Handbook of Field Experiments

and the Czech Republic, employers put more effort in opening and reading resumes of
majority compared to minority candidates. In contrast, in the rental housing market,
landlords acquire more information about minority compared to majority candidates
through their personal sites.
The ﬁndings can best be explained by a model where attention is endogenously
determined by the type of the market. When the choosing entity needs to select “top
candidates,” it will allocate attention to candidates belonging to the group that, according
to its priors, is stronger. In markets where most candidates are accepted, some kind of a
threshold rule might be used, and the choosing entity will want to eliminate the weakest
candidates. In that case (e.g., a housing market), more attention would optimally be allocated to members of the group that is a priori viewed less favorably. The model implies
persistence of discrimination in selection decisions, even if information about individuals
is available and there are no differences in preferences. The model also implies lower
returns to employment qualiﬁcations for negatively stereotyped groups (as their credentials are less likely to be reviewed). From a policy perspective, the model and results of this
paper also highlight the crucial role of the timing of when a group attribute is revealed.
Bartos et al. (2013) represents a great example of how the resume study infrastructure
can be pushed forward to deliver deeper learning, cleaner links to speciﬁc theories of why
differential treatment is taking place, and suggestions about policies that might be most
effective to address it. More efforts along these lines would help revitalize this literature.
We now turn to other approaches to measuring discrimination, often more “labbased” and more closely tied to a particular model of the root of discrimination.

2.6 Implicit association tests
The implicit Association Test (IAT) is a computer-based test that was ﬁrst introduced by
Greenwald et al. (1998). Developed by social psychologists Greenwald, Nosek, and
Banaji, as well as other collaborators, the IAT provides a method to indirectly measure
the strength of association between two concepts. This test relies on the idea that the
easier a mental task is, the quicker it can be performed. When completing an IAT, a subject is asked to classify, as rapidly as possible, concepts or objects into one of four categories with only two responses (left or right). The logic of the IAT is that it will be
easier to perform the task when objects that should get the same answer (left or right)
somehow “go together”.16
The typical IAT consists of seven “phases,” including practice phases to acquaint the
subject with the stimuli materials and rules. Consider, for example, an IAT designed to
assess association strengths between categories of black and white and attributes of good
and bad. The practice phases are used with the materials and sorting rules. In the ﬁrst,
16

See Lane et al. (2007) for an excellent introduction to IATs.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

subjects would only be presented with faces as stimuli and be asked to assign white faces
to one side and black faces to the other; in the second, subjects would only be presented
with words as stimuli and be asked to assign pleasant words to one side and unpleasant
words to the other. In the test phases, subjects are asked to simultaneously sort through
stimuli representing the four concepts (black, white, good, and bad) but with again only
two responses (left side or right side). In two of the test phases (the “stereotypical” test
phases), items representing white and good (e.g., white faces and words such as wonderful) need to be placed on one side of the screen and items representing the concepts black
and bad (e.g., black faces and words such as horrible) on the other. In the other two test
phases (the “nonstereotypical” phases), items representing the concepts of black and good
need be placed on one side of the screen and items representing the concepts of white and
bad on the other. The extent to which an individual dislikes black faces (in this case) is
then measured by the difference in milliseconds in response time between the stereotypical phases and the nonstereotypical phases.17
Two broad kinds of IAT are pertinent to discrimination: if attitudes or overall preferences are the issue, the category (e.g., black/white) is associated with words that represent good/bad (as in the example we just gave). Alternatively, one may be interested in
the association between a category (e.g., male/female) and a particular trait or attribute
(e.g. career/family).18 The ﬁrst kind is called an attitude IAT and the second a stereotype
or belief IAT. Other types include self-esteem IATs (e.g., categories are self and other and
words are either positive or negative).
Since the publication of the original IAT, there have been hundreds of IAT studies,
many of which try to capture attitudes that could give rise to discrimination (against black
people, Muslims, women etc.) or phenomena more akin to statistical discrimination
(women and math, women and career, women and politics, etc.). The IAT has been
extremely inﬂuential both within and outside academic psychology. Greenwald,
McGhee, and Schwartz’s original 1998 article introducing the IAT has 6689 citations
in Google Scholar, as of August 2015. The ﬁndings of IAT research on discrimination
have been cited to propose changing the law, educating judges, and students, etc.
IATs are used increasingly as a convenient tool to measure whether attitudes respond
to any particular intervention, since they can be conducted remotely, with large samples
of online participants to experiments. As such, they are often used as end points in psychology experiments, as experimentation moves to online platforms.19

17

18

19

In practice, of course, a number of choices must be made about how to use the data, and this is reviewed in the study
by Greenwald et al. (2003).
For example, Nosek et al. (2002) ﬁnd stereotypical associations connecting male terms with traits related to science
and a career, whereas female terms are found to be associated with liberal arts and family.
For examples of IATs used as end points, see Lai et al. (2014).

337

338

Handbook of Field Experiments

There are a number of meta-analyses, review articles, and critical papers on the use of
IATs. It is not in the scope of this paper to review all of this literature; however, the key
question that is raised is what the IAT actually picks up and, relatedly, whether it is effectively associated with other predictors of discriminatory behavior and discriminatory
behavior itself. Some individual studies show promising links. For example, implicit
bias predicts a more negative judgment of ambiguous actions by a black target (Rudman
and Lee, 2002), as well as more negative nonverbal “microbehavior” (less speaking time,
less smiling, etc.) during an interaction with a black subject (McConnell and Leibold,
2001). This is important, as these microbehaviors are often posited to be the channel
through which implicit bias would translate into different behavior, even among people
who do not report explicit discrimination.
Some studies have also shown some mechanisms for those effects, for example,
showing that participants who exhibited greater implicit distaste of black people were
more likely to detect aggression in a black (but not white) face (Hugenberg and
Bodenhausen, 2004). Only a few studies have investigated whether these differences
in implicit attitudes are associated with different behaviors in the ﬁeld. In Atlanta and
Boston, doctors with stronger anti-black implicit attitudes were less likely to prescribe
thrombolysis for myocardial infarction to African-American patients, compared to white
patients (Green et al., 2007). Rooth (2010) tried to relate the behavior of recruiters in a
correspondence study in Sweden (focusing on Arab-Muslim vs. Christian) to recruiterlevel measures of implicit discrimination they collected later. Unfortunately, they were
only able to interview 26 percent of the recruiters they were targeting, but among those,
they did ﬁnd a correlation between implicit distaste of Arabs as measured in an IAT test
and the tendency to not call back a resume with an Arab-Muslim name on it.
An initial meta-analysis, conducted on 122 research reports, found that the IAT does
seem to be capturing something about attitudes, perhaps more accurately than selfreports (Greenwald et al., 2009). They show that there is a strong correlation between
implicit and more standard explicit measures. Moreover, the IAT appears to be a better
predictor of actual behavior than explicit reports, particularly for sensitive subjects such as
racial preferences (for which they have 32 samples with IAT measure, explicit measure,
and questions about behavior).
However, a more recent meta-analysis by Oswald et al. (2013) questions these initial
ﬁndings. Using a larger sample (which includes newer studies as well as some studies that
were omitted from the earlier meta-analysis), and a slightly different aggregation method,
they ﬁnd much lower correlation of the IAT with various measures of discrimination
than had been initially found in the 2009 meta-analysis. Explicit measures perform
equally poorly, to be sure, but not much worse.
Beyond this debate (which is probably the core one to be had), IATs have been subject to a number of criticisms and questions, mainly regarding their interpretation. First,
to the extent that they differ from explicit attitudes, do they reﬂect something “deeper”

Field Experiments on Discrimination

about the individuals and are they more “true” than the self-description in any sense or
simply another type of attitude? Interestingly, the meta-analysis by Oswald et al. (2013)
shows that there is in fact a strong correlation between different brain activities when
seeing black and white faces and the IAT. This suggests that the IAT does reﬂect something fundamental about psychological processes. But our behavior is mediated by the
social environments, exactly as our answer to a question on prejudice is mediated by
this environment.
So do IATs really identify prejudice or just some raw psychological “material” that we
then transform? What does it mean for someone to feel that they are not prejudiced
against blacks but have their IAT showing automatic white preferences (Arkes and
Tetlock, 2004)? On this last question, Banaji et al. (2004) argue that conscious unbiased
attitudes cannot be relied upon in all circumstances, and that IATs may capture unconscious attitudes that may be more relevant in explaining behaviors in other circumstances.
Hence, they reject the idea that “if prejudice is not explicitly spoken, it cannot reﬂect a
prejudicial feeling” (Banaji et al., 2004). In this respect, though, the low correlation
between the IAT and microbehavior is a bit troubling, as this theory would suggest
that the unconscious bias translates into actual acts of discrimination via unconscious
behavior.
Also, do IATs measure the prevalent culture or individual attitudes? For example: if a
person identiﬁes women with family more than with career, is she making a value judgment or stating, in a sense, a fact of life?
Whatever the resolution of these debates, the measured implicit attitudes vary
considerably across people, and the robust correlationsdbetween implicit and explicit
attitudes, between the different IATs in similar domainsddo seem to indicate IATs
capture some signal about the individual. This does not mean that the IAT can be
considered a reliable measure of the attitude of any particular individual (at best, it measures attitudes with considerable noise). However, it does mean that the IAT may be a
good measurement tool for the propensity for groups to discriminate toward each
other.
In this context, whatever the predictive value of the IAT for behavior, the extent to
which it is affected by a particular manipulation is of interest. As economists, we may be
more interested in the extent to which attitudes can be inﬂuenced (by experiences, the
environment, or speciﬁc interventions), than in their pure measurement at a point in
time. Using IATs as an outcome variable also helps side stepping the question of whether
they represent any deep truth about anybody: while the signal may be noisy, to the extent
that there is signal, this may be a useful measurement tool. As noted, after more than a
decade of using the IAT mainly as a descriptive tool, studies in psychology started using
them as outcomes. For example, Lai et al. (2014) set up a research contest on debiasing,
where teams are given a budget of 5 minutes to interact with participants, and the
outcome is the scores on a black-white attitude IAT.

339

340

Handbook of Field Experiments

In recent years, economists have also started using IATs as dependent variables. For
example, Beaman et al. (2009) design and implement two IATs in West Bengal, India,
to measure preferences toward female leaders and stereotypical association of women
with domestic rather than political activities. They then examine the impact of exposure
to female leaders on these two measures (we will discuss the results below in Section 2.7).
Lane et al. (2007) provide detailed and helpful instructions on how to build an IAT.
The software that is needed to construct and analyze the test (millisecond software) is
available for purchase. IATs can be designed with only verbal or image stimuli for subjects
who are not literate (this is what Beaman et al., 2009 use), and although, they are more
difﬁcult in populations that have had no experience with computers and for older participants, they can be a very useful tool. As studies increasingly use electronic data collection methods (on tablets or notebooks), the extra cost of adding an IAT diminishes.
Of course, the debate in psychology does not suggest that the IAT should be considered a “magic bullet,” suitable to replace any other measure of discrimination. In particular, it is probably not a substitute for good measures of actual behavior in policy
interventions. Nevertheless, it can be an extremely useful intermediate variable, to
understand the mechanisms beyond a result (in Beaman et al., 2009 the ﬁnal end point
of interest is actual voting) or, potentially, if collected beforehand, as a covariate of interest. For example, in the study by Glover et al. (2015), the IAT is used as a proxy measure
of latent employer discrimination (see further details in Section 3.2.2).

2.7 Goldberg paradigm experiments
Goldberg paradigm experiments are laboratory versions of audit or correspondence
studies. They are named after a 1968 experiment by Goldberg where students graded
written essays, which were identical except for the male or female name of their author
(Goldberg, 1968). This initial experiment demonstrated a bias: female got lower grades
unless the essay was on a feminine topic. Since then, a large literature in psychology
has used the Goldberg paradigm to identify discrimination against different
groups and, in particular, in the resistance to female leaders.20
In the typical lab experiment, a group of subjects is asked to review a vignette,
describing the behavior of a female or male manager, for example, or witness a confederate (male or female) simulating a leadership situation. The participants are then asked to
evaluate the leader’s competence or to say whether they would have liked to have them
as leader for a task they may collectively perform. Reviewing a large number of such
studies, Eagly et al. (1992) do not ﬁnd that, on average, female leaders are evaluated
signiﬁcantly more negatively than male leaders. However, there are in some circumstances where they do ﬁnd that female leaders are evaluated more negatively: for
20

See Eagly et al. (1992) for a review and meta-analysis of the literature on such resistance to female leaders.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

example, when the leadership was carried out in a masculine style (in particular, when the
leader was projected to be authoritative). This supports Eagly’s hypothesis of “role
congruence”: what people dislike is when women behave in a nonfeminine way. Since
strong leaders must be assertive, but women must be demure, it makes it difﬁcult for
women to be appreciated as strong leaders.
The fact that the circumstances are artiﬁcial, and answers have minimal stake associated with them, make those experiments less relevant, on their own, than ﬁeld-based
correspondence tests. But one advantage of the Goldberg-style experiments is that
they can be easily and, ﬁnely, manipulated, which makes them good outcome measures
in ﬁeld research (or ﬁeld experiments). They can also be easily added to a standard survey
instrument. For example, Beaman et al. (2009) seek to ﬁnd out how discrimination
against female leaders is affected by prior exposure. They administer two Goldberg-style
experiments. In one, they ask the participants to listen to a speech by a political leader,
which is read either by a female or a male actor (note that it is important that there
are several male and female actors). In the second one, they discuss vignette where
women or men leader make decisions that are either pro-male (investment in irrigation)
or pro-female (investment in drinking water). Each individual receives a randomly
selected version of the speech and vignette. The randomization is stratiﬁed by
village and, hence, by prior exposure to a female leader (due to a policy of gender reservation). While this does not tell us the extent to which any single person discriminates,
one can learn whether, on average, exposure to a female leader affects the extent to
which individuals give lower grades to women in response to the same speech or
vignette. Beaman et al. (2009) ﬁnd that both men and women, but men more than
women, tend to discriminate against female leaders (additional results from this study
are discussed further in Section 4.1.2).

2.8 List randomization
Like correspondence tests or Goldberg experiments, list randomization (also known as
item count technique, unmatched count, or list response) does not provide a measure
of individual bias but can provide an estimate of the extent of discrimination in a population. They are a way of eliciting accurate answers to questions of discrimination in the
presence of social desirability bias. The idea is to present the subjects with a list of N statements which are generally noncontroversial but could be true or false (e.g., I had coffee at
breakfast; I like popcorn).21 Then, a randomly selected group of people are asked a
potentially controversial statement (e.g., “I would be upset if an African-American family
moved next door”) on top of the N noncontroversial statements. The subject only states
21

As we explain below there is a tension in the choice of those questions: for maximum precision they should be
behavior that almost everyone says yes or no to, but then they do not give any cover to the subject.

341

342

Handbook of Field Experiments

the number of statements with which he or she agrees. Comparing the fraction of yes
among those who got N and those who got N þ 1 statements gives a good measure
of discrimination. And clearly no one (including the interviewer) will know how a given
subject answered the controversial statement. Unlike the IAT, this method will not
reveal biases that are unconscious or biases that the subject wants to deny even to himself
or herself, but it will prevent the results from being affected by social desirability bias.
Early applications of list randomization to measure discrimination are Kuklinski et al.
(1997a,b). Both studies found considerable racial prejudice in the American South using
list randomization techniques (though not in the North). Furthermore, they found higher
level of measured discrimination using this method than using direct elicitation methods;
for example, respondents are more likely to disagree with a statement such as, “I am
comfortable with a black family moving next door” when asked via list randomization
than with a traditional survey. Likewise, Coffman et al. (2013) show that stated discrimination against gay populations is much lower in response to a direct question in the control
group than when it is elicited through the list randomization method. For example, respondents were 67 percent more likely to express disapproval of an openly gay manager
at work when the question is part of a list than when the question is asked directly.
A few papers have used the method to elicit attitudes toward presidential candidates.
Kane et al. (2004) ﬁnd no discrimination against a Jewish presidential candidate (Joe Lieberman). Martinez and Craig (2010) ﬁnd that few whites in Florida seem distressed by the
possibility of having a black president. However, list randomization revealed much more
opposition toward the idea of a female president than opinion polls (Streb et al., 2008). As
noted previously, several studies suggest that the randomized list technique yields
different answers than direct elicitation. In a meta-analysis across 48 comparisons of direct
report and list randomization, Holbrook and Krosnick (2010) found that 63 percent of
the estimates for socially undesirable behaviors were signiﬁcantly larger when elicited
through list randomization. On the other hand, responses on nonsensitive behavior
tend to be more similar (Tsuchiya et al., 2007).
The list randomization method is however not without issues. As we alluded to
earlier, there is a fundamental tension between precision (which would require having
statements to which everybody responds yes or no) and providing “cover” to the subject
(which would require the opposite). The implication is that the results from list randomization methods are often quite imprecise. Gosen (2014) has also shown results tend to
systematically depend on how many noncontroversial statements are included in the
list, although the opposite was found in Tsuchiya et al. (2007).
In summary, list randomization could be a promising method to measure discrimination as it is less subject to social desirability bias, but since few economists have used it,22

22

See Karlan and Zinman (2012) for an example of an application in economics.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

more work needs to be done to ascertain its usefulness in the ﬁeld. In comparison to other
indirect methods, list randomization is often more simple to administer (both for surveyors and respondents) but risks having low power (Droitcour et al., 1991). It would
be interesting to see more research comparing measures of discrimination obtained
through list randomization compared to an IAT or Goldberg-style experiment. It would
also be interesting to compare how noisy these different measures are. The fact that the
list randomization method can only provide an aggregate (and not individual) measure of
discrimination complicates its use as an outcome variable (say, for a randomized
experiment) but no more than any of the other methods we have already discussed
that also only give group-level outcomes, such as the Goldberg-style experiments.

2.9 Willingness to pay
A key prediction of Becker’s model of taste-based discrimination is that people should be
willing to pay to interact with people of their own group. Somewhat surprisingly this
prediction has not given rise to a large literature trying to evaluate the willingness to
pay to discriminate. As we noted, the correspondence and audit tests tend to be based
on a binary measure (interview or not, hire or not).
Until recently, the body of work that came closest to measuring such willingness to
pay was a literature on the “beauty premium” motivated by Hamermesh and Biddle’s
(1994) ﬁnding that workers with better-than-average looks earn 10e15 percent higher
wages. Analogous to the black-wage race gap, the beauty premium could be due to the
fact that more beautiful workers are more productive, say because consumers prefer to
interact with beautiful people (Biddle and Hamermesh, 1998; Pfann et al., 2000) or
because beautiful people are more conﬁdent. Or employers may be wrong in their belief.
Mobius and Rosenblat (2006) set up a laboratory experiment where undergraduates
and graduates from Tucuman, Argentina, were randomly assigned into groups of “employers” and “workers.” In the experiment, “employers” had to hire “workers” to
perform a maze-solving task. After a practice test (which was recorded and became the
digital “resume” of the worker) and a question where the workers estimated the number
of mazes they could solve in 15 minutes, each worker was matched to ﬁve employers,
who saw either (1) just the resume, (2) the resume and a photo, (3) the resume and a
phone interview, or (4) the resume plus an interview, plus the photograph.23 The employers in turn saw ﬁve workers, and for each of them they decided how many mazes
they thought the worker could solve. This estimate contributed to the employer’s
own payment. It also entered into the calculation of the actual wage of most of their
workers.
23

The wages of “workers” were affected by the difference between their estimation of the number of mazes and what
they actually competed, therefore they were incentivized to tell the truth.

343

344

Handbook of Field Experiments

Mobius and Rosenblat show that productivity at the task is not affected by beauty (as
evaluated by 50 high school students on the basis of the photograph), although worker
conﬁdence is. A rise of one standard deviation in beauty increases conﬁdence by 13e16
percent. However, employers are willing to pay more employees who are considered to
be more beautiful: in all the treatments where they can see beauty, employers are willing
to pay workers more. The premium ranges between 12 and 17 percent depending on the
treatment. Decomposing the beauty premium by comparing treatments, the authors estimate that 15 percent is due to the conﬁdence channel and 40 percent each through the
visual and oral stereotype channels (the fact that beauty still affects wages when the
employer does not see the employee but talks to her on the phone indicate that beauty
is correlated with speaking skill, perhaps another feature of the beauty channel). Interestingly, employer’s estimated productivity is not affected by whether or not they know that
it will actually contribute to the worker’s wage. This suggests that there is little pure tastebased discrimination in this lab experiment. Employers give a premium to beautiful people because they believe (wrongly) that they will be more productive.
There are a number of limitations of this experiment, not least of all, from the point of
view of this chapter, that it is a lab experiment. It is also limited to a one-shot interaction
at the hiring stage. Nevertheless, it sets an interesting template for what a ﬁeld experiment
leveraging this methodology might look like and, in particular, does an excellent job
laying out the various pieces that are needed to establish discrimination and understand
the mechanism behind it.
One paper which has recently followed in Mobius and Rosenblat’s footstep is the
study by Rao (2013), which seeks to measure the extent to which well-off kids in India
discriminate against poorer kids (in order, as we will discuss in more detail in Section 4.2,
to estimate the extent to which any such discrimination is affected by forced exposure to
poorer kids through an afﬁrmative action program in education). To do so, Rao sets up
an ingenious ﬁeld experiment, based around team selection for a relay race. First, students
from a rich private school and a poor public school, who were all present at a sporting
event to support their classmates, were randomized in different sessions with different prizes for winning the race (from Rs 50 to Rs 500, which are very high stakes). After mixing
for 15 minutes, they watched a series of one-on-one sprints (most of them pitting a poor
student against a rich one), and then each was asked to indicate on a worksheet which of
the two he wanted as teammate for the relay race. After these choices were revealed, one
of the choices was picked, the teams were formed, and the relay race was run. To make
sure that there was a “cost” to picking out a poorer students (if students did not like
them), students had to spend 2 hours socializing with their teammate, which was
announced prior to team selection. This experiment has a number of clever features.
It presents children with a real choice, and by varying the stakes, it makes it clear how
much (on average) students are willing to sacriﬁce to avoid interacting with a poor student. The sprint phase entirely and unambiguously reveals ability, so the setup is targeted

Field Experiments on Discrimination

to pick up pure taste-based discrimination (e.g., dislike of hanging out with a poor
teammate).
The results show that there is substantial taste-based discrimination in this context: in
19 percent of the cases where the poor students is the fastest, rich students prefer to pick
the rich student as a teammate anyway.24 Discrimination does decline as the stakes increase: discrimination falls from 35 percent with the lowest stake, to 27 percent with
the intermediate stake, and 5 percent in the highest stake. Fitting a structural model
to the data, Rao estimates that, for students without prior exposure to poor classmates,
the distaste of interacting with a poor student is worth Rs 37. That is, a student is willing
to give up to Rs 37 in expected prize money to hang out with a rich student rather than a
poor one.

3. CONSEQUENCES OF DISCRIMINATION
3.1 Self-expectancy effects
3.1.1 Stereotype threat and underperformance
Models of statistical discrimination explain the differential treatment of disadvantaged
groups in say, hiring decisions, due to employers’ inability to perfectly predict a given
worker’s future productivity and hence their rational decision to assign some weight
to the average productivity of the worker’s racial group. For example, African-Americans
as a whole are categorized as less productive than whites, and employers take this supposed average difference in productivity into account when deciding whether or not
to hire any African-American job candidates, given their inability to precisely predict
each speciﬁc candidate’s future productivity.
While discrimination emerges under the logic above as a consequence of average differences in productivity across groups, research in social psychology has provided
convincing evidence for the reverse causal channel. In particular, the simple process of
categorizing or “stereotyping” some groups as less productive appears to cause these
groups to be less productive. This research suggests that individuals from some groups
may suffer negative performance outcomes (such as lower test scores or less engagement
with academics) because of the burden of the “stereotype” or “stereotype threat” (Steele
and Aronson, 1995).25 The key conjecture is that the threat of being viewed through the
lens of a negative stereotype can create an anxiety that disrupts cognitive performance.
In a seminal study, Steele and Aronson (1995) demonstrated in a lab setting
that inducing stereotype threatdby asking test takers to indicate their race before the
24

25

In contrast, if a rich student is the fastest, he is picked 97 percent of the time and among two students of the same
background, the fastest is picked 98 percent of the time.
Deﬁned by Steele and Aronson (1995) as a “risk of conﬁrming, as self-characteristic, a negative stereotype about one’s
group.”

345

346

Handbook of Field Experiments

testdsigniﬁcantly undermines African-Americans’ performance on intellectual tasks.
They also showed that reducing stereotype threatdby convincing test takers that the
test was not being used to measure their abilitiesdcan signiﬁcantly improve AfricanAmericans’ performance, dramatically reducing the racial gap.
Numerous lab studies have since replicated the effects of stereotype threat both with
respect to social identities other than race (e.g., gender, income class, etc.) and with
respect to mediating outcomes (such as blood pressure, heart-rate variability, performance expectations, effort, etc.).26
The rest of the social psychology research on the stereotype threat has also focused on
documenting methods that can undo or undermine the threat of the stereotype. One line
of research has addressed the underlying message of the stereotypedthat stereotyped individuals are inherently limited because of their group membership. Thus, if participants
can be convinced that intelligence is not a ﬁxed trait, but a malleable quality that can be
increased with hard work and effort, they may be less prone to stereotyping. Levy et al.
(1998) present evidence consistent with this idea. Descriptively, they ﬁnd that people
holding an entity theory of intelligence (i.e., intelligence is a ﬁxed trait) made more stereotypical trait judgments of ethnic and occupational groups than those who believed
that intelligence is malleable. Moreover, in a small lab experiment, they found that
manipulating implicit theories affected the level of stereotyping, at least temporarily.
In the experiment, 155 introductory to psychology students were randomly assigned
to a fake “scientiﬁc” article that either presented evidence for an entity (ﬁxed) or an incremental (malleable) view of personality. After reading the article, they were presented
with questions in which they had to rate the extent to which a series of 15 traits accurately
describe certain occupational groups (teachers, doctors, lawyers, and politicians) and
ethnic groups (African-Americans, Asians, and Latinos). To try to reduce the likelihood
of participants recognizing the link between the article and the questions, the researchers
told participants that the questions were for a separate study and that they would be asked
questions on the content of the article later. The experiment found a small but signiﬁcant
effect: those who read the article that argued for ﬁxed personality were less likely to

26

While most of these lab studies have been conducted by social psychologists, a few have been performed by
economists. For example, Dee (2009) ran a lab experiment with student athletes and nonathlete students at
Swarthmore College, randomly assigning some of them to a treatment that primed their awareness of a stereotyped
identity (i.e., student athlete). He ﬁnds that the treatment reduced the test-score performance of athletes relative to
nonathletes by 14 percent. Also, Hoff and Pandey (2006) present evidence from a caste priming experiment in Uttar
Pradesh, India. Among 321 high-caste and 321 low-caste junior high school male student volunteers, there were no
caste differences in performance in an incentivized maze-solving task when caste was not publicly revealed, but
making caste salient created a large and robust caste gap in performance. However, the mechanisms for the
underperformance in this case seems quite different from the hypothesized mechanism in the social psychology
literature. In particular, the authors ﬁnd that when a nonhuman factor inﬂuencing rewards received for the mazesolving task (a random draw) was introduced, the caste gap disappeared. The results suggest that when caste identity is
salient, low-caste subjects anticipate that their effort will be poorly rewarded.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

believe traits can change and more likely to rate stereotypical traits as highly descriptive of
their respective groups.
Similarly, in a lab experiment, Aronson et al. (2002) assign white and black students to
one of three conditions to assess the impact of an intervention designed to reduce stereotype threat. In two conditions, students were asked to write a letter of encouragement to
a younger student who was experiencing academic struggles. In one of these conditions,
students were prompted to endorse a view of intelligence as malleable, “like a muscle”
that can grow with work and effort. In the second condition, students endorsed the
view that there exist different types of intelligence. The third condition served as a control condition in which students were not asked to compose a letter. Several days after the
intervention, all students were asked to indicate their identiﬁcation with and enjoyment
of academics. Results showed that black students in particular were more likely to report
enjoying and valuing education if they had written a letter endorsing malleable intelligence. In addition, grades collected 9 weeks following the intervention were signiﬁcantly
higher for blacks in the malleable intelligence condition. Whites showed a similar,
though statistically marginal, effect.27
While most research on stereotype threat, and how to undo it, has taken place in the
lab, a few interesting ﬁeld studies have also been conducted by social psychologists.
Schools, where test-taking and performance measurements are part of normal operations,
have provided a natural setting for much of this ﬁeld research.
Good et al. (2003) performed a ﬁeld experiment to test methods for helping female,
minority, and low-income adolescents overcome the effects of stereotype threat and,
consequently, improve their standardized test scores. Speciﬁcally, seventh-grade students
in the experimental conditions were mentored by college students who encouraged
them either to view intelligence as malleable or to attribute academic difﬁculties in the
seventh grade to the novelty of the educational setting. Results showed that females in
both experimental conditions earned signiﬁcantly higher math standardized test scores
than females in the control condition. Similarly, the studentsdwho were largely black
or Hispanic and low-income adolescentsdin the experimental conditions earned significantly higher reading standardized test scores than students in the control condition.
Blackwell et al. (2007) based a ﬁeld experiment on the laboratory ﬁnding on “malleable
intelligence.” They randomly selected half of a group of 95 mainly African-American and
Hispanic seventh graders to participate in an 8-week training on the theory of malleable
intelligence based on interventions that had been successful in the lab (25 minutes per
week, in the students’ classroom). In the control condition, student also received small

27

It is important to note that for this experiment, while the randomized interventions took place in the lab, outcomes
are measured (1) on naturally occurring tasks outside the lab and (2) quite a long time after the interventions took
place; both of these features are important strengths of this experiment compared to the standard “stereotype threat”
lab experiments.

347

348

Handbook of Field Experiments

group coaching but not on this theory. Students in the experimental conditions obtained
higher grades.
Good et al. (2008) also conducted a ﬁeld experiment where they explored stereotype threat and its negation in high-level college math courses that typically serve as
gateways to careers in math and science. Male and female students in the last course
of an advanced university calculus sequence were given a practice test containing items
similar to those found on the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) standardized test.
All students were told that the test was “aimed at measuring your mathematical abilities” (stereotype threat) but half of the students additionally were assured that “this
mathematics test has not shown any gender differences in performance or mathematics
ability” (stereotype threat negation). Test performance was higher for women than men
in the stereotype threat negation condition but was equivalent in the stereotype threat
condition.
In a related ﬁeld study, Cohen et al. (2006) reduced the black-white Grade point
average (GPA) gap among low-income middle school students by afﬁrming the students’
self-concepts (and presumably inoculating them from stereotype threat) at the beginning
of the school term. The intervention is very light touch: students are asked to write a series of short essays focusing on a self-afﬁrming value. The authors ﬁrst found short-term
impacts, and then, most remarkably, fairly large long-term impacts: over 2 years after the
intervention, the average GPA of an African-American student who participated in the
essay writing was 0.24 higher than that of the control group (Cohen et al., 2009). Most of
the effects is concentrated among those who were initially low achieving. These are
remarkable numbers, especially since the effects of most education interventions tend
to fade. The authors speculate that the long-term beneﬁts may be due to the fact that
initial psychological state sets out a self-fulﬁlling trajectory.
Cohen’s work has since then been replicated and extended in other similar contexts,
and Dweck and Cohen’s initial insights have helped jumpstart a subﬁeld of psychology
called “mindset studies.” Yeager et al. (2014) experiment with “wise feedback,” an intervention where high school students are given critical feedback on their written work,
alongside with a note emphasizing the high standard of the teachers and the belief that
the student can succeed. The intervention reduces mistrust among African-American students and improves the quality of the ﬁnal product.28
3.1.2 Identity and preferences
The “stereotype threat” literature can be viewed as part of a broader literature on how selfidentity considerations may affect behavior and preferences of disadvantaged groups and
28

A background paper written for a White House conference gives a good overview of the literature on mindset studies
(Yeager et al., 2013).

Field Experiments on Discrimination

ultimately may perpetuate gaps in economic outcomes. The same way that women may do
poorly on a math test when reminded of their gender (due to the anxiety-inducing burden
of the stereotype of “girls not being good at math”), they may also show low risk preferences when reminded of their gender (if nurtured with the behavioral norm that “girls
should not take risk” by gender-biased parents and/or teachers).
Against the backdrop of a large literature in social psychology that has tested the self-categorization theory and the cognitive mechanisms through which it operates,29 a few recent
papers in economics have leveraged the lab environment to learn more about how various
social identities relate to preference parameters, such as risk, time, and social preferences.
For example, Benjamin et al. (2010) explore the effect of racial and gender category
norms on time and risk preferences. In a laboratory setting, they study how making
salient a speciﬁc aspect of one’s social identity affects subjects’ likelihood to make riskier
choices or more patient choices. From a methodological perspective, the study consists of
temporarily making more salient (“priming”) a certain social category (as is done in the
“stereotype threat” literature) and seeing how the subjects’ choices are affected. For
example, the gender identity salience manipulation is done through a questionnaire
included in the beginning of the experiment in which subjects are asked to identify their
gender and their opinion regarding living on a coed versus single-sex dormitory ﬂoor.
The study uncovers some interesting patterns with respect to racial identity. For example,
priming a subject’s Asian-American identity makes the subject more patient. Hence, an
Asian-American identity might partly contribute to the higher average level of human
capital accumulation in this racial group.
However, making gender salient appears to have no signiﬁcant effects on either men’s
or women’s patience or their level of risk aversion. Of course, it is possible that the priming performed in this experiment was too weak to temporarily affect preferences. In other
words, it is difﬁcult to afﬁrmatively conclude from these nonresults that gender identity
norms are not culturally reinforcing whatever biological differences may exist between
the sex in the willingness to take risks.
Another lab study aimed at assessing how social preferences are affected by gender
identity is the study by Boschini et al. (2009). The question under study here is whether
gender identity priming affects subjects’ level of altruism. The experiment consists of
comparing behavior in a dictator game for subjects whose gender identity has been
primed versus not primed. The results indicate that the priming does affect behavior
but only when the subjects are assigned to mixed-gender groups. Moreover, the effect
is driven by males: men are sensitive to priming and become less generous in a mixedgender setting when primed with their male identity. Women do not appear to respond
to the treatment.

29

See for example Reicher and Levine (1994), Forehand et al. (2002), and LeBoeuf et al. (2010).

349

350

Handbook of Field Experiments

As far as we are aware of, no ﬁeld experiment exists on how social identity affects
preferences and behaviors outside of the mindset literature discussed previously, which
focuses on education and on adolescents. It seems worthwhile for future research to
consider such work. Interventions might be designed to emphasize a “default” social
identity that may be counterproductive for that social group’s performance against an
“alternative” social identity. For example, while deciding to work hard
toward completing college coursework for a young black father might be uncool because
it is “acting too white,” the decision might resonate much more when his identity as a
“father” is being primed. Moreover, speciﬁc interventions might be designed to simply
undo or undermine the power of the social identity norms when they work
toward reinforcing differences in behaviors and outcomes between groups. If women
decide against applying for a job in a high-risk but also high-return occupation because
of internalized conservative social norms about “what is appropriate work for a woman,”
it might be possible to undermine the pull of this conservative norm with counteractive
“messaging,” in the same spirit as what has been done to undermine the burden of the
stereotype in the “stereotype threat” literature. Such interventions might be particularly
powerful if the timing of the counteractive “messaging” is close to when women are
making these important career choices (e.g., when applying for school or on a job search
website or when considering which contact in their LinkedIn network to reach out to).

3.2 Expectancy effects and self-fulﬁlling prophecies
3.2.1 Pygmalion and Golem effects
Suppose minority and majority workers have similar inherent abilities. How could differential beliefs about their abilities persist? One explanation is that employers’ beliefs that minorities are on average less productive are self-reinforcing (Arrow, 1973; Coate and Loury,
1993). This could happen for two reasons. First, minority and majority workers may rationally make different skill investment or effort choices in the face of the beliefs of their employers. A minority worker may see less value in investing in her skills if she knows that the
employers will be slow in updating their beliefs and hence less likely to promote her. Second, the employers themselves may invest less in the minority workers (e.g., investing in
training) if they do not believe that the workers will be “up to the task.” In both cases,
employers’ beliefs about minority workers will be self-fulﬁlling.
The social psychology literature offers multiple demonstrations of such self-fulﬁlling
prophecies.30 Interestingly, most of these demonstrations took place in the ﬁeld.
30

The ﬁrst self-fulﬁlling prophecy to be investigated extensively in psychology was the experimenter effect. The
experimenter effect refers to the possibility of the experimenter inﬂuencing subjects to respond to the treatment in a
way that conforms to the experimenter’s expectations. Rosenthal (1963) summarized a dozen experimenter-effect
studies and wondered whether similar interpersonal expectation effects occur among physicians, psychotherapists,
employers, and teachers.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

The earlier work on self-fulﬁlling prophecies in the social psychology focused on how
heightened expectations can be self-fulﬁlling. In a seminal study, Rosenthal and Jacobson
(1968) conducted a ﬁeld experiment in a US public elementary school (Oak School).
Teachers were deceived into believing that a set of one-ﬁfth of their class were expected
to develop (“blossom and spurt”) much faster than the rest, as measured by IQ points
(supposedly measured by the Harvard test of inﬂicted acquisition). In fact, this set was
randomly selected. The main outcome measure was an IQ test (Test of General Ability),
administered at the start of the school year (pretest) and at 4 months (end of ﬁrst semester), 8 months (end of second semester and of ﬁrst year of school), and 20 months (end of
second school year with a different teacher). Rosenthal and Jacobson showed that the
students for whom teachers had raised expectations had faster IQ gains than control students in the same classes (the treatment children gained 12 IQ points over the course of
the year, and the control children gained 8), with the biggest effect on ﬁrst and second
grade children by the end of the ﬁrst year. Rosenthal and Jacobson dubbed this boost in
achievement driven by teachers’ beliefs the “Pygmalion effect.”
The Pygmalion effect in the classroom was subsequently studied intensively31 and
criticized extensively. Snow (1995) reanalyzed the data from the original experiment,
highlighting that approximately 35 percent of the IQ observations fall out of the normal
range and that there are several observations which have rapid growth in pretest and posttest scores (e.g., increasing from 17 to 110). He ﬁnds that the expectancy effect on IQ
disappears when these outlier scores are omitted. A relatively recent review of the literature (including a balanced review of the meta-analysis and the various critics) concludes
that while the Pygmalion effect in the classroom is real, it is probably fairly modest (Jussim
and Harber, 2005).
Since this early work, social psychologists have demonstrated the self-fulﬁlling nature
of leaders’ expectations in several other ﬁeld settings and have tried to better understand
the underlying mechanisms. Rosenthal (1994) and Eden (1992) provide a review of
much of the work in this literature. For example, Eden and Shani (1982) replicated
the original design and results of Rosenthal and Jacobson (1968) in the Israeli Defense
Forces. But they also concluded, based on additional survey work to complement the
randomized controlled trial, that leadership behavior was a key mediator in generating
the Pygmalion effect.
Also using the Israeli Defense Forces as a ﬁeld, Eden and Ravid (1982) interestingly
combined expectancy and self-expectancy manipulations in a single study. Trainees
included 60 men in the ﬁrst half-year of military duty enrolled in a 7-week clerical course
divided into ﬁve training groups, each instructed by a commander. To produce the

31

See Dusek et al. (1985) and Rosenthal and Rubin (1978), which was one of the ﬁrst meta-analysis in psychology and
was based on 345 studies and Rosenthal, 1994, which updates it for reviews.

351

352

Handbook of Field Experiments

Pygmalion effect, a random quarter of each instructor’s trainees were described to the
instructor as having high success potential. Another random quarter was told directly
by a psychologist in a brief personal interview that they had high success potential, in order to induce high self-expectancy. The remaining trainees served as controls. Learning
performance was signiﬁcantly higher in both high expectancy groups than in controls,
conﬁrming the Pygmalion hypothesis and the additional hypothesis that inducing high
self-expectations similarly enhances trainee performance. Interestingly, while several instructors were unexpectedly relieved midway through the course, the hypothesized performance differentials continued even though the authors abstained from refreshing the
expectancy induction among the substitute instructors, reﬂecting the possible durability
of expectancy effects. Finally, Eden and Ravid (1982) also showed that equity considerations among the trainees likely played a mediating role: trainees in both of the high expectancy conditions reported feelings of overreward, which may have motivated them to
improve their performance.
While the Pygmalion literature shows that the self-fulﬁlling nature of raising leaders’
expectations, another branch of this literature also demonstrated the self-fulﬁlling nature
of lowering those expectations. Psychologists have dubbed this the “Golem effect”.
There have been far fewer studies on the Golem effect than the Pygmalion effect,
given the trickier ethical issues associated with lowering leaders’ expectations (Reynolds,
2007). This challenge has led to research designs that are not quite as “clean” as those used
to demonstrate the Pygmalion effect. For example, Oz and Eden (1994) randomly led
treatment-assigned squad leaders (n ¼ 17) in a military unit to believe that low scores
on physical ﬁtness tests were not indicative of subordinates’ ineptitude, while control
squad leaders (n ¼ 17) were not told how to interpret test scores. Tests indicated that
low-scoring individuals in the experimental squads improved more than those in the
control squads. While the researchers employed a respectable research design and were
cautious to abide by ethical standards, the sample was extremely small and the researchers
did not directly attempt to lower supervisors’ expectations.
Given the challenge of doing research on the Golem effect, an alternative approach in
the literature has been to rely on natural variation in leaders’ expectations, rather than
exogenously varying those expectations. For example, Babad et al. (1982) studied expectation effects among physical education student teachers. They found that pupils about
whom they imparted high expectations to the instructors performed best (i.e., the standard design for a demonstration of the “Pygmalion effect”). However, they also found
that pupils toward whom instructors naturally harbored low expectations performed
worse than those regarding whom they had high or intermediate natural expectations,
consistent with a “Golem effect.”
A recent paper (Kondylis et al., 2015) demonstrates the power of self-fulﬁlling prophecy. In villages, either women or men were randomly selected to learn a new technology
and teach it to others. Women retained more information from the training and those

Field Experiments on Discrimination

who were trained by them did in fact learn more. But women ended up performing
much worse in terms of the number of farmers they convinced because other farmers
perceived women as less able and, hence, paid less attention to their messages.
3.2.2 Endogenous responses to bias
While the Pygmalion and Golem effects demonstrate the self-fulﬁlling nature of leaders’
expectations about performance on that performance, they are not directly tied to
discrimination. Are leaders’ biases against some groups also endogenously affecting the
performance of these groups? Two recent ﬁeld studies in the economics literature provide what we believe is the ﬁrst ﬁeld-based answers to this question. Conceptually, these
studies follow a very similar research approach to that in the study by Babad et al. (1982)
to demonstrate the relevance of self-fulﬁlling prophecies as an explanation for persistent
differences in performance between different groups of workers or students. Speciﬁcally,
rather than “artiﬁcially” priming leaders to vary their level of bias, the analysis relies on
randomly assigning those trainees to leaders who are known to have different levels of
bias. To be clear, the limit of this design compared to the preferred “Pygmalion design”
is that any unobserved factors that are systematically correlated to different levels of biases
among leaders cannot be formally ruled out as an explanation for the ﬁndings. However,
the two papers below take several ingenious steps to deal with this concern.
Glover et al. (2015) studied cashiers in a French grocery store chain, a sizable share of
whom were of North African and Sub-Saharan African origin. They assess whether cashiers performed worse on the days when they were assigned to a manager who was more
biased against their group. They measured managers’ bias toward workers of different
origins using an IAT test. The cashiers in these stores worked with different managers
on different days and had virtually no control over their schedule, allowing the authors
to use the quasi-randomness of the schedules to assess the causal effect of being paired
with a more biased manager. To address the difﬁculty raised previously of manager
bias being correlated with some other manager characteristics that might also affect
employee performance (for example, more biased managers might also be less skilled),
they use a difference-in-difference methodology, comparing the change in minority
workers’ performance under biased and nonbiased managers with the change in nonminority workers’ performance under these two types of managers. They ﬁnd that on days
when they are scheduled to work with biased managers, minority cashiers are more likely
to be absent. When they do come to work, they spend less time at work; in particular,
they are much less likely to stay after their shift ends and they scan articles more slowly
and take longer between customers.
Glover et al. (2015) also report interesting complementary survey evidence to better
understand mechanisms. They do not ﬁnd that minority workers report that they dislike
working with biased managers more, or that biased managers dislike them, or that biased
managers make them feel less conﬁdent in their abilities. However, they do ﬁnd evidence

353

354

Handbook of Field Experiments

that biased managers put less effort into managing minority workers. Minority workers
report that biased managers were less likely to come over to their cashier stations
and that biased managers demanded less effort from them. Consistent with this, they
ﬁnd that the effect of manager bias grows during the contract, perhaps as workers may
learn that they are not being monitored by biased managers.
Lavy and Sand (2015) estimate the effect of primary school teachers’ gender biases on
boys’ and girls’ academic achievements during middle and high school, as well as on the
choice of advanced-level courses in math and sciences during high school. In particular,
they tracked three cohorts of students from primary school to high school in Tel-Aviv,
Israel. They measured teachers’ gender-biased behavior by comparing their average
marking of boys’ and girls’ in a “nonblind” classroom exam to the respective means in
a “blind” national exam marked anonymously. For identiﬁcation, the authors rely on
the conditional random assignments of teachers and students to classes within a given
grade and a primary school. They compare outcomes for students who attended the
same primary school but were randomly assigned to different teachers, who have
different degrees of stereotypical attitudes. They ﬁnd that being assigned to a more
gender-biased teacher at early stage of schooling has long-run implications for occupational choices and hence likely subsequent earnings in adulthood. Speciﬁcally, teachers’
overassessment of boys in a speciﬁc subject has a positive and signiﬁcant effect on boys’
achievements in the national test on that subject administered during middle and high
school, while it has a signiﬁcant negative effect on girls’. In addition, assignment to primary school math teachers favoring boys over girls encourages boys and discourages girls
from engagement in advanced math courses offered in high school.

3.3 Discrimination in politics and inequality across groups
A direct consequence of discrimination in politics and other leadership positions is that
there are fewer members of the discriminated group with the power to act in the interests
of others in their group. In a standard median voter world, the underrepresentation of
women or other subordinate groups in politics would matter less, as elected politicians
would endeavor to represent the interest of the median voter. But if politicians cannot
commit to a particular political platform, and their group membership eventually determines the type of policies they will implement, then the lack of representation at the top
means that the underrepresented groups in society will get worse outcomes (Besley and
Coate, 1997; Pande, 2003). This would also occur if the absence of a leader means that
the underrepresented groups ﬁnd that they cannot express their preferences in the political arena.
The best evidence on the consequences of discrimination in politics comes from
studies that have evaluated what happens to the underrepresented groups when they
ﬁnally gain political representation. A few observational studies have exploited

Field Experiments on Discrimination

exogenous shocks to representation due to close elections; a few other papers have also
studied nonrandomized variation in mandates.32 There have also been a set of studies that
exploit the random selection of places that have to elect a leader from a historically
underrepresented group (caste, tribe, or gender) in India’s local governments. Comparing
villages that were randomly selected to receive either a male or female head,
Chattopadhyay and Duﬂo (2004) ﬁnd that female leaders spend more on goods that
women prefer, compared to those that men prefer. Beaman et al. (2010) replicate the results over a longer period. Using a data set that covers a larger number of states, they ﬁnd
that the results persist over time, and that investments in drinking water (a preferred good
for women) continue to be higher even after the seat is not reserved anymore and women
have (generally) left power.33 Iyer et al. (2012) show that greater female representation
(in local governments) is related to more crimes against women; using a household-level
crime victimization survey in Rajasthan; they however show that the increase is not due
to an actual increase in the amount of crimes but rather greater willingness to report such
crimes. Finally, Chattopadhyay and Duﬂo (2004) further ﬁnd that village leaders from
scheduled castes invest more in scheduled castes hamlets.34

3.4 Beneﬁts of diversity?
Discrimination leads to less-diverse ﬁrms, legislative assemblies, etc., but does diversity in
itself matter for society? What are the implications of the low diversity that discrimination
may generate for the performance of organizations and society in general?
3.4.1 Does homogeneity hurt or help productivity?
A long literature in political economy and development has tended to emphasize the cost
of diversity, in particular ethnic diversity. If members of different groups do not like each
other, diversity creates holdups, breeds conﬂicts, makes it difﬁcult to agree on public
good provision, etc.
Lang (1986) proposes that the roots of discrimination are communication difﬁculties
across different groups (what he calls “language communities”). A similar argument is
made by Lazear (1999). In that view of the world, segregation arises naturally, because
homogenous groups are more productive (since communication within them is faster
and easier). More homogeneous groups will create a trusting environment where people
can work better together. While the minority will suffer as a result, the short-run
32
33

34

See Pande (2003), Clots-Figueras (2009, 2011), and Rehavi (2007) for examples.
Bardhan et al. (2010) compare places before and after reservation and do not ﬁnd a difference in what leaders do, but
since there seems to be a lingering effect of quota on pro-female policies, this ﬁnding might not be so surprising.
Dunning and Nilekani (2013) ﬁnd little impact of the reservation on distribution of goods by ethnic group and a
strong impact of parties, but they use a regression discontinuity design strategy rather than focusing on a states where
the assignment is random.

355

356

Handbook of Field Experiments

equilibrium is efﬁcient, and policies directly aimed at increasing diversity would be
socially counterproductive. The role of policy should be instead to diminish language
barriers between groups (e.g., through the education system).
Others have emphasized the beneﬁts of diversity and potential drawbacks of “homophily” (or the tendency to want to associate only with people like oneself). One powerful
argument is that similar people will tend to have similar information and perspectives, and
if people only interact with people like themselves, lots of valuable information will be
not transmitted across groups. Arguments along these lines have been made, more or less
formally, in the human resources and management literature. More formally, Golub and
Jackson (2012) show that, when agents in a network prefer to associate with those having
similar traits (homophily), it may take a very long time for participants in a network to
converge to a consensus.
Ultimately, there is thus a tradeoff between the cost of communication and collaboration and the beneﬁts of diverse viewpoints, which means that diversity (and hence
homophily) may in theory hurt or improve productivity (Hamilton et al., 2003; Alesina
and Ferrara, 2005).
While there is a large nonexperimental literature on the impact on diversity on public
good provision35 and a sizeable lab experimental literature,36 the ﬁeld experimental literature is more nascent. There are nevertheless a few interesting recent papers that we review in the following section.
Hoogendoorn and Van Praag (2012) and Hoogendoorn et al. (2013) experimentally
varied the composition of teams of undergraduate student required to start a business venture as part of a class. In teams of 12, students start up, sell stock, and run a real company
with a proﬁt objective and shareholders for a year. They ran the experiment on 45 teams
and 550 students.
The composition of teams was varied by gender (men only, women only, or mixed)
and ethnicity (the fraction of non-Dutch ethnicity varied from 20 percent to 90 percent).
Students then had a year to choose their venture, elect ofﬁcers, conduct meetings, produce, sell, make money, and liquidate. This was a ﬁeld experiment; the program played
out over a year, and the incentives to do well were very high. Students’ ability to graduate, their grades, and potentially some money, were all on the line.
There is a clear beneﬁt to gender diversity in the experiment. The performance as a
function of the share of women in the team is inverse U-shaped, with the peak reached
when the share of women is approximately 0.55. The authors attribute this effect to
greater monitoring in gender-diverse groups. This in itself is an interesting ﬁnding as

35
36

See Alesina and Ferrara (2005) for a review of the literature on diversity.
For example, see Woolley et al. (2010) and Engel et al. (2014).

Field Experiments on Discrimination

this is not a mechanism that is emphasized in the theoretical literature: perhaps when
communication is too easy, workers become more complacent.
For ethnic diversity, the result is more subtle: Hoogendoorn, Oosterbeek, and Van
Praag ﬁnd that the marginal effect of increasing diversity on performance is zero or
perhaps even negative when the teams are least 50 percent Dutch. However, once the
teams are less than 50 percent Dutch, further increases in the share of other groups are
associated with better performance. The authors also identify evidence for the different
channels proposed in the theoretical literature (including higher communication costs in
more diverse groups but also more diverse knowledge in more diverse teams), but these
results are not extremely precise.
Hjort (2013) analyzes a natural experiment where a ﬂower ﬁrm in Kenya randomly
assigned workers to teams. Kenya offers a context with heightened ethnic tensions and
where the level of distrust among different groups may be particularly high. In the
experiment, an upstream worker distributed ﬂowers to a team of two downstream
workers. The upstream worker earned w per ﬂower packed and the downstream
worker, 2w per ﬂower packed. Hjort ﬁnds that, conditional on productivity, upstream
workers distribute fewer ﬂowers to teams when one or both are not from his ethnic
group, at the cost of lower wages for him, and lower production overall. Furthermore,
within mixed teams, upstream workers give more ﬂowers to the worker from their
same ethnic group. Interestingly, the output gap between homogenous and ethnically
mixed teams doubled during the period in 2008 when ethnic conﬂict intensiﬁed. In
response to this, the ﬁrm introduced team pay for the downstream workers (not randomized) and subsequently experienced an increase in the productivity of the ethnically
mixed teams.
Also in Kenya, Marx et al. (2015) randomly assigned enumerators to pairs, and each
pair to a supervisor. The job of the enumerator was to make contact with a household
and administer an intervention. They ﬁnd that homogenous pairs have higher
productivity and they attribute that to higher trust in those teams. However, when a
pair is further matched with a supervisor of the same ethnic group, the productivity is
lower (not higher). The contrast between the (negative) impact of diversity in horizontal
teams and the (positive) impact in vertical relationships in the Marx et al. (2015) experiment hints at a different potential negative impact of discrimination: in-group preference
may create room for cheating and corruption. In their setting, the coethnic supervisor
was willing to let the enumerators cheat.
3.4.2 Discrimination and corruption
Prendergast and Topel (1996) provide a theoretical analysis of the inﬂuence of favoritism
on optimal compensation and extent of authority for the manager. The point extends
further than the ﬁrm: discrimination may lead to misallocation of resources by politicians
(to members of their ethnic group) or conversely to willingness to put up with corrupt or

357

358

Handbook of Field Experiments

incompetent politicians from one’s own group (rather than less corrupt ones from
another group) (Key, 1949; Padro i Miguel, 2007). More generally, voters’ preferences
for a group may diminish the role of issues in campaign and by implication the quality
of government (Dickson and Scheve, 2006).
Besley et al. (2013) provide nonexperimental evidence of this effect: they show
that in Sweden, after the social democratic party imposed gender balance by requiring
that all candidates be selected in a “zipper” pattern (one man/one woman), the
quality of the male candidates greatly increased (they call this the “crisis of the mediocre
man”).
Experimental evidence of the link between homophily and the quality of politicians
or corruption level is rare. One interesting experiment took place in Uttar Pradesh,
India’s most populous state, where the rise in caste-based politics has been accompanied
by a staggering criminalization of politics (Banerjee et al., 2010). On the eve of the 2007
election, 206 of the sitting members of the legislative assemblies had a criminal case
pending against them (Banerjee and Pande, 2009). Prior to the 2007 election, the authors
conducted a ﬁeld experiment in which villages were randomly selected to receive
nonpartisan voter mobilization campaigns (street plays, puppet shows, or discussions).
One type of campaign encouraged citizens to vote on issues, not on caste, while the other
encouraged them to not vote for a corrupt candidate. They found that the caste campaign
led to a reduction of the (reported) votes on caste and to a reduction in the vote share
going to candidates with a criminal record. It, thus, seems that successfully reducing
discrimination (in this case, to be more precise, reducing lower caste group members’
tendency to systematically discriminate against higher caste candidates) does lead to an
improvement in the quality of elected leaders.
The natural experiment in India discussed in Section 3.3 that introduced quotas for
women in politics shed interesting light on this question as well. In the short run at least,
reservation for women politicians reduced bribe taking (Beaman et al., 2010). Of course,
in the short run, quotas do not increase competition (since on the contrary the pool is
reduced to women only, whereas it was initially open to women and men), and the
observed reduction of corruption could be due to inherent characteristics of
women or to their lack of experience. However, quotas do tend to increase political
competition in the medium run because once a woman leaves ofﬁce and her seat is
open, she (or her relative) has the option to run again, but the ﬁeld is now more open
to competition than if she were a traditional incumbent. Moreover, when Banerjee
et al. (2013) collected data on what happens in previously reserved places, they found
that female incumbents whose seats became free were less likely to run than male incumbents whose seat became free, but that this effect disappeared when they considered not
only the incumbent but the incumbent and his or her family. In other words, the probability to elect someone from the incumbent’s dynasty remains the same in places that just
have experienced a quota or not. Also, they found that the probability of reelection of

Field Experiments on Discrimination

someone from the incumbent’s family is more sensitive to past performance in the previously reserved places. Thus, the best politicians’ dynasties are more likely to be reelected
after reservation, and the worst ones less likely to. To the extent this effect persists, it does
suggest that policies that constrain voters to vote outside of their “comfort” zone may
improve the quality of the decision-making process overall even after these constraints
are lifted.
3.4.3 Law of small numbers
Even if discrimination does not lead to outright corruption, it may restrict the pool of
available candidates. Research shows that the leader quality matters both for ﬁrms
(Bertrand and Schoar, 2003) and for countries ( Jones and Olken, 2005). If discrimination
implies that leaders have to be selected from a relatively small pool, it reduces the chance
that the most talented person will be picked, and it thus may have negative productivity
consequences.
The empirical evidence (even nonrandomized) on any such consequence of
discrimination is thin at best: Ahern and Dittmar (2012) and Matsa and Miller
(2013) examine the impact of the Norway 2006 law which mandated a gender quota
in corporate board seats. They both ﬁnd negative consequences on proﬁtability and
stock prices. However, these are short-run impacts. It could be that women are temporally less effective because they are less experienced or that they maximize something
else other than short-run shareholder value, which may turn out to be proﬁtable in
the long run.
Unfortunately, we do not see an experiment on this nor can we think of an obvious
design for one. But this would be a very intriguing avenue for further research.

4. WHAT AFFECTS DISCRIMINATION?
4.1 Leaders and role models
One effect of discrimination against a group is that few leaders emerge from it into the
mainstream. This has potentially three consequences. First, mechanically, fewer people
from this group are in a position to make a decision regarding others. To the extent that
leaders discriminate against members from other groups, discrimination will persist.
Second, the majority group may be reinforced in their belief that the minority group
is incapable of success, since they have rarely, if ever, observed success of the minority
in practice. And third, members of the minority group may then feel that either they are
incapable of succeeding, or that the world is rigged against them, and there is no point
in even trying.37 Given all this, discrimination could be lessened by forcing exposure to
37

See, for example, Lockwood and Kunda (1997).

359

360

Handbook of Field Experiments

leaders from groups that are traditionally discriminated against, which is often
achieved through quotas. This section reviews the evidence for this and also points
out the gaps.
4.1.1 Does diversity in leadership positions directly affect discrimination?
Mechanically, discrimination may breed discrimination because the decision-making power is concentrated with the majority group. For example, if managers are mostly males,
they may tend to favor other males in their recruiting or promotion decisions. This may
happen because they themselves discriminate (consciously or unconsciously) or because
they know more males and are more likely to promote or hire people they know or who
are more similar to them.38 This tendency is part of the rationale for requiring a certain
fraction of women on corporate boards, in academia or in appointment, evaluation, and
promotion committees.
It is, however, not obvious that minority group leaders, or committees that contain
such minority leaders, would necessarily favor others from the minority: faced with their
own discrimination, they may feel the need to go to lengths to avoid being perceived as
biased. In several observational studies, women were not inclined to judge other women
more favorably than men.39 In group decisions, there may also be a response of other
members of the committee, who may try to “undo” any agenda they perceive (rightly
or wrongly) the minority group members to have.
The empirical evidence of the impact of minority representation on selection committees largely comes from a series of very interesting papers by Bagues et al. Bagues and
Esteve-Volart (2010) examine the impact of the gender composition of the evaluation
committee for the entry exam in the Spanish judiciary on the success of women in that
exam. A causal study is made possible by the fact that people are randomly assigned to a
committee. They ﬁnd that women are less likely to succeed at the exam when the committee they are assigned to has more women, while the opposite is true for male candidates. Additional evidence in the study suggest that these results might be driven at
least in part by the fact that female evaluators tend to overestimate the quality of
male candidates.
Zinovyeva and Bagues (2011) and Bagues et al. (2014) present interesting evidence
from randomized academic evaluation committees in Spain and Italy, respectively. In
both countries, candidates for promotion appear in front of a centralized committee to
38

39

Bagues and Perez-Villadoniga (2012) provide evidence from entry exams into the judiciary in Spain that support the
latter effect; Bagues and Zinovyeva (2015) show that the former effect also applies in the case of academic
promotions.
See Booth and Leigh (2010) for an audit study in Australia, where they ﬁnd no interaction between the gender on the
resume and the gender of the recruiter. See also Broder (1993) for similar evidence in the context of NSF proposal
reviews, and Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) for referee reports.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

be qualiﬁed. Files are assigned to randomly composed committees. In the Spanish case,
the authors ﬁnd no impact of an additional female committee member on the promotion
likelihood of female candidates. In the Italian case, they ﬁnd a negative effect: in a ﬁvemember committee, with each additional female member added to the committee, the
success rate of female applicants relative to that of male applicants decreases by around
two percentage points. Analyzing the voting records, they ﬁnd both that (1) the same
female candidate is scored on more harshly by females than by males, and (2) male committee members grade female candidates more harshly when there are women on the
committee, perhaps because they are trying to compensate for a perceived bias in favor
of women on such committees [even though in reality the opposite appears to be true
given (1)].
This evidence on academic and recruitment committees is striking and suggest that
some type of afﬁrmative action may in fact hurt promising female candidates. It would
be interesting to see if it also carries through in other settings, such as management or
political decisions. The study by Bursell (2007) is an audit study that makes some progress in this direction (although the speciﬁc comparison it focuses on is itself not experimental). He sent 3552 applications to 1776 jobs in Sweden, including applications to
more skilled positions, such as senior/high school teachers, IT professionals,
economists, and engineers and compares, among other things, the call-back rates for applicants with Swedish-sounding and noneSwedish-sounding names according to the
name of the CEO. He ﬁnds, consistent with the evidence previously mentioned
that, when the “CEO of a company has a foreign-sounding name, the applicants
with a Swedish-sounding name have a 2.4 times higher probability to receive a callback. If the CEO has a Swedish-sounding name, the probability is 1.7 times higher”
(Bursell, 2007).
4.1.2 Minority leaders and the attitude of the majority
Even if there is no direct effect of having women or minority members in on leadership
decisions, it could still affect discrimination against the minority because those minority
individuals in leadership positions will change the beliefs, or precision of the beliefs, of the
majority about the competence of the minority group.
In a working paper version of Beaman et al. (2009), the authors propose a
model where taste and statistical discrimination reinforce each other. Suppose that there
are strong tastes (or social norms) against having a female leader. Then, it is very likely
that citizens have never observed a female leader in action. This makes female leaders
riskier as a group: even if citizens believe that female leaders are equally competent
on average, they have much more precise priors about male leaders, and to the extent
they are risk averse, this will lead them to avoid women leaders. This is of course
reinforced if citizens start with the prior that women are less competent: they will
never have the occasion to ﬁnd out that in fact they are wrong. In this world,

361

362

Handbook of Field Experiments

forcing exposure to minority leaders (political leaders, board members, colleagues in
academic departments, students at top colleges, etc.) will have a persistent
negative impact on discrimination, even if it does not affect the underlying taste for
the community, simply by affecting beliefs about the competence of the minority
group.40
The impact might be reinforced if the image of what constitutes a good leader also
evolves in response to what people see. The “role incongruity” theory by Eagly and
Karau (2002) stipulates that one reason why people prefer male leaders is that the traits
associated with leadership (strength, assertiveness) are not traits that are associated with
women under prescriptive gender norms (such as being nice, accommodating, etc.).
Yet, as people get to see many (not just one or two token) women leaders who are
strong, but also nice, or who have an effective, but also more accommodating, leadership
style, then people may change their attitude toward female leaders. As inconsistencies between the female gender stereotype and qualities associated with leadership diminish, so
will prejudice toward female leaders.
Of course, a potential force in the opposite direction is the possibility of backlash
against minority leaders, in particular, if there is a perception that they got into their leadership role because of special treatment (Coate and Loury, 1993).
Beaman et al. (2010) study a natural experiment in the context of local electoral politics in India and are able to provide more evidence for the mechanism underlying the
persistent effect of temporary afﬁrmative action policies. In a context where local village
councils are randomly selected, by rotation, to be forced to elect female leaders, the authors show that after a cycle of reservation (and even more when the same place
happened to be reserved for a woman for two cycles in a row), more women run,
and are elected, on unreserved seats. While there could be many reasons for this
(including the fact that women may have become more willing to run, or that networks
of women may have been created), they provide evidence that it is probably at least in
part due to a change in attitude in the villages that were previously subjected to reservation. They collect evidence on attitudes in various ways: with a Goldberg-type
experiment and with two IATs, one for like or dislike for female leader (a more “hardwired” attitude that their model takes no stance on) and one for a stereotype associating
women with domestic activities and men with leadership activities (in the spirit of the
assessing whether “role incongruity” effects diminished). They ﬁnd that the experience
with the past quota does not affect preferences (as measured by the taste IAT), although it
tends to harden stated preferences against women in leadership. However, citizens

40

In an observational study, Miller (2014) ﬁnds evidence consistent with such effects in the context of afﬁrmative action
programs in the United States. US government contractors are forced to hire minority workers. Miller ﬁnds that,
after an establishment is no longer subject to such afﬁrmative action because it stops being a government contractor,
the black employment share nevertheless continues to grow.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

(particularly men) update on measures of perception of women’s competence. For
example, their rating of a speech pronounced in female voice converges to that of a
speech given by a male voice if they have been exposed to a quota either in this cycle
or in the previous cycle. Moreover, the stereotypical IAT also shows a decrease of the
stereotype that associates women with domestic activity rather than with leadership.
This provides reasonably strong ﬁeld evidence that exposure to role models from another
group affect attitudes. The evidence seems quite robust: Bhavnani (2009) also ﬁnds that
women continue to be more likely to be elected after a seat was reserved for a while (in
urban Maharashtra). Banerjee et al. (2013) also ﬁnd, in Rajasthan, that women are more
likely to run (and win) on a previously reserved seat.
Although there is a vast laboratory literature that test the role incongruity theory and
its implications and laboratory studies that show, for example, that college students
asked to screen candidates for a typical male job (e.g., ﬁnance manager trainee) are
less likely to discriminate against a female resume after reading an editorial documenting
women’s success in this type of job (Heilman and Martell, 1986), we are not aware of
ﬁeld experiments that investigate these types of effect in other contexts (e.g., exposure
to a female or black manager, minority teachers, etc.). It would be valuable to establish
whether such impact on the majority’s attitude can also be documented in some of these
other contexts.
4.1.3 Role models, aspirations, and the attitude of the minority
Leaders issued from disadvantaged groups, in addition to their direct decision-making
power and to the effect they may have on the opinion of the majority could also serve
as role models and trailblazers. They might affect the attitudes of the minority group
about their own ability to succeed or their aspirations to do so. Seeing successful women
or blacks may lessen stereotype threat (as discussed in Section 4.1.2) or the belief among
those groups that society is rigged against them so there is no point in trying anyway. In
both cases, exposure to role models may increase effort and lead to better outcomes for
the minority, even without direct changes in the majority attitude (though this could of
course trigger subsequent change in the majority’s beliefs and attitudes as well). However, as noted by Lockwood and Kunda (1997), these positive effects might be moderated by how ﬁxed minority group members view their ability and how personally
relevant and attainable they consider the achievement of the role models.
As in the case of the impact of exposure on the attitudes of the majority, there is both
a descriptive and a laboratory literature on this question. The observational literature
looks for correlation between either outcome (e.g., teen pregnancy) or measure of stereotyping (e.g., IAT) to naturally occurring exposure (e.g., black teachers). For example,
Dasgupta and Asgari (2004) show that women who have been exposed to female teachers
and role models are more likely to associate women and leadership. A laboratory experiment literature explores the extent to which exposure to stereotypically feminine role

363

364

Handbook of Field Experiments

model in a science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) career (Betz and
Sekaquaptewa, 2012) or exposure to a nonstereotypical computer science role model
(Cheryan et al., 2011) increases the likelihood that girls will present themselves as interested in STEM. Interestingly, and maybe in line with the cautionary note in the study by
Lockwood and Kunda (1997), these studies show that a role model that simply belongs to
the minority group might not be sufﬁcient, and that the “type” of role model appears to
matter signiﬁcantly.
Cheryan et al. (2011) ﬁnd that exposure to a nonstereotypical computer science role
model (e.g., someone who dresses fashionably, enjoys sports and hanging out with
friends, and watches “normal” TV shows, such as “The Ofﬁce”) through a “getting to
know each other” task in the lab increases female subjects’ beliefs of succeeding in the
ﬁeld, and that this is true regardless of the gender of that role model. Similarly to the discussion in Section 3.1.2 on “social identity,” the authors argue that this is because women
feel the stereotypical characteristics of a computer science major (e.g., social isolation,
obsession with computers, social awkwardness) do not align with what they see as their
female gender role (e.g., helping others, having social skills, attending to physical appearance), and a nonstereotypical role model, whether man or woman, can thus inﬂuence
young girls’ preferences and beliefs. On the other hand, Betz and Sekaquaptewa
(2012) ﬁnd that counterstereotypic-yet-feminine STEM role models (as signaled by
characteristics such as wears makeup and pink clothes, enjoys reading fashion magazines,
etc.) discourage middle school girls’ success expectations in STEM relative to genderneutral STEM role models (as signaled by characteristics such as wears dark-colored
clothes and glasses, enjoys reading books, etc.). The authors ﬁnd that this is particularly
the case for girls who did not identify with STEM subjects and conclude that this subgroup of girls viewed the combination of both STEM success and femininity as
unattainable.
Reviewing either literature fully is outside the scope of this chapter, but the mixed
results of the lab experiments provide interesting directions for ﬁeld research.
Here again, however, the ﬁeld experiment work so far appears to be quite limited.
Beaman et al. (2012) study the same randomized natural experiment for women in leadership positions in India and look at the impact on girls’ educational attainment and career
aspirations. They give evidence of impact on parents’ hopes for daughters. Compared to
never-reserved villages, parents in reserved villages were more likely to state that they
would like their girl to graduate or study beyond the secondary school level and more
likely to state that they would like their daughter to have a career. Parental aspirations
for boys did not change. Furthermore, in villages with reservation, girls were more likely
to stay in middle school, which cannot be directly attributed to any direct action of the
leader because middle schools are not under their jurisdiction. This is therefore strongly

Field Experiments on Discrimination

suggestive of a causality running from role model to change in aspirations and actual
change in behavior.
Overall, this literature seems to us surprisingly thin, compared to the larger literature
on “horizontal exposure” (e.g., roommates or classmates) which we discuss in Section
4.2. Part of the explanation for this is practical: there is probably more naturally occurring variation in peer groups than in supervisors, leaders, or teachers. Another issue is
that in many settings, female teachers or leaders may take actions that can translate
directly into behavioral changes for female students (or trainees) even absent any effect
on aspirations, so that isolating the impact on minority aspirations is tricky. While this
was not the case in the quota experiment in India, it could have been. Nevertheless, we
suspect that the lack of more ﬁeld studies in this area is also a reﬂection of too little
attention devoted to this important and exciting topic, and that much more probably
can be done to explore how exposure to role models affects minority groups’
aspirations.

4.2 Intergroup contact
Allport (1954) developed the contact hypothesis, also known as intergroup contact
theory. Allport argued that, under appropriate conditions, interpersonal contact is an
effective method to reduce prejudice: if majority group members have the opportunity
to communicate with minority group members, they are able to understand and
appreciate them, and prejudice will diminish. In particular, according to Allport,
prejudice will be reduced through intergroup contact if four features of the contact
situation are present: equal status between the groups in the situation, common goals,
intergroup cooperation, and the support of authorities, law, or custom.
Much of the psychology literature on the contact hypothesis has focused on lab experiments that have helped reﬁne Allport’s original theory. An unresolved issue in psychology is whether speciﬁc conditions for the contact situation are needed to ensure that
contact will have the theorized effect. For example, is it important for the contact to take
place in a cooperative environment with peers of equal status (e.g., two roommates in a
university dorm working together on a math homework) for contact to be effective at
reducing discrimination? In a meta-analysis combining observational and experimental
studies of the intergroup contact theory, Pettigrew and Tropp (2000) ﬁnd that intergroup
contact reduces prejudice in 94 percent of the 515 studies reviewed. Their meta-analysis
also suggests that the contact effect generalizes to a broad range of minority groups (not
just racial and ethnic minorities but also the elderly, the mentally ill, LGBT, etc.) as well
as a broad range of contact settings (schools, homes, etc.). Pettigrew and Tropp (2000)
also assess whether the optimal conditions for contact stated by Allport are necessary
for positive contact outcomes. They ﬁnd that the inverse relationship between contact
and prejudice persists, though not as strongly, even when the contact situation is not

365

366

Handbook of Field Experiments

structured to match Allport’s conditions. Hence, while Allport’s conditions may not be
necessary for prejudice reduction, some combinations of them might be relevant. Psychologists are still debating and investigating the speciﬁc negative factors that may prevent
intergroup contact from diminishing prejudice.
While much of the experimental research on the contact hypothesis has taken place in
the lab, there have also been quite a few ﬁeld experiments. Green et al. (2016) identify 56
ﬁeld experiments.
The best-known ﬁeld work within economics has focused on contact between college roommates. Sacerdote (2000) was the ﬁrst to exploit the random assignment of
roommates at college for a study of peer effects on test scores. More relevant to us,
Boisjoly et al. (2006) leveraged random roommate assignment at Harvard to study the
impact of shared experiences at college on opinions about the appropriateness of keeping
afﬁrmative action policies. They ﬁnd that white students who are randomly assigned
African-American roommates are signiﬁcantly more likely to endorse afﬁrmative action.
Hence, mixing with African-Americans tends to make individuals more empathetic to
them. They also ﬁnd that white students who were assigned roommates from any minority group are more likely to continue to interact socially with members of other ethnic
groups after their ﬁrst year.
What remains unclear from Boisjoly et al. (2006) is whether contact to a minority
roommate reduced stereotype or bias. Empathy might increase even if bias is unaffected.
Burns et al. (2015) leveraged the same design to get at this question, and hence, their
paper is closest to a ﬁeld test of the contact hypothesis. Speciﬁcally, they exploit random
assignments of roommates in double rooms at the University of Cape Town to investigate whether having a roommate of a different race affects interethnic attitudes but
also cooperative behavior and academic performance. They ﬁnd that living with a
roommate from a different race signiﬁcantly reduces prejudice toward members of
that group, as measured by an IAT. The reduction in stereotype is accompanied by a
more general tendency to cooperate, as measured in a Prisoner’s dilemma game, but
smaller effects on trust, as measured in a trust game. The paper also reports interesting
results on grades. Black students that are assigned a nonblack roommate experience
higher GPAs; white students that are assigned a nonwhite roommate experience
lower GPAs.
Related ﬁndings are reported in the study by Shook and Fazio (2008). Participants
were white freshmen who had been randomly assigned to either a white or an African-American roommate in a university college dormitory system. Students participated
in two sessions during the ﬁrst 2 and the last 2 weeks of their ﬁrst quarter on campus.
During these sessions, they answered questions about their satisfaction and involvement
with their roommates and completed an inventory of intergroup anxiety, as well as an
IAT test. Automatically activated racial attitudes (as measured with the IAT) and intergroup anxiety improved over time among students in interracial rooms but not among

Field Experiments on Discrimination

students in same-race rooms. However, participants in interracial rooms reported less
satisfaction and less involvement with their roommates than did participants in samerace rooms.
Several ﬁeld experiments in psychology have also examined contact effects between
classmates. In particular, psychologists have looked at cooperative learning techniquesd
which are designed so that students must teach to one another and learn from one
another and place a strong emphasis on the academic learning success of each member
of the groupdand tested whether these help reduce prejudice (Johnson and Johnson,
1989; Slavin, 1995). The rational is that because cooperative learning encourages positive
social interactions among students of diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds, it creates
some of the conditions hypothesized in Allport as beneﬁcial to reducing discrimination:
as students work cooperatively, they have the opportunity to judge each other on merits
rather than stereotypes. Slavin and Cooper (1999) provide a review of the ﬁeld evidence
on cooperative learning, which has been generally supportive of cooperative learning being a useful tool to improve intergroup relations.
For example, Slavin (1977, 1979) study one particular approach to cooperative
learning, called Student Teams Achievement Divisions. Under this approach, the teacher
presents a lesson, and students then study worksheets in four-member teams. Following
this, students take individual quizzes, and team scores are computed based on the degree
to which each student has improved over his or her own past record. The team scores are
published in newsletters. He ﬁnds that the students who had experienced such cooperative learning over periods of 10e12 weeks gained more cross-racial friendships than did
control students. In a follow-up 1 year later, Slavin (1979) found that the students that
experienced cooperative learning named an average of 2.4 friends outside their own
race, compared to an average of less than one in the control group. Also, Slavin and
Oickle (1981) found signiﬁcant gains in whites’ friendships toward African-Americans
as a consequence of using the same cooperative learning method, but, interestingly, no
difference in African-American friendships toward whites.
A recent paper in economics also brings the contact hypothesis to the classroom but
under conditions that are not tailored to be as optimal as possible for prejudice reduction
to occur, at least as hypothesized by Allport. Starting in 2007, some elite private schools in
Delhi were required to offer places to poor students. Rao (2013) exploits this policy
change and uses a combination of experimental and administrative data to study whether
exposure of rich students (from 14 private schools in New Delhi) to poorer students affects (1) tastes for socially interacting with or discriminating against the poor, (2) generosity and prosocial behavior, and (3) learning and classroom behavior. Core to his
identiﬁcation strategy is a comparison of outcomes for treated and nontreated student
cohorts within a school. Rao also exploits a second identiﬁcation strategy that is closer
to a randomized design. Some schools in his sample used the alphabetic order of ﬁrst
name to assign students to study groups and study partners. Hence, in those schools,

367

368

Handbook of Field Experiments

the number of poor children with names similar to a given rich student provides plausibly
exogenous variation in personal interactions with a poor student. This second identiﬁcation strategy is obviously more appealing as a test of the contact hypothesis because it focuses more centrally on changes in personal interactions between students and rules out
other confounds (such as changes in teacher behavior, changes in the curriculum, etc.).
Rao (2013) ﬁnds that economically diverse classrooms cause wealthy students to
discriminate less against other poor children outside school. As discussed in Section
2.9, Rao’s approach to measure discrimination is quite unique. First, he relies on a ﬁeld
experiment in which rich participants select teammates for a relay race and are forced to
reveal how they tradeoff more-athletic poor students versus less-athletic rich students.
Using this measure of discrimination, Rao ﬁnds that exposure to poor students at school
reduces discrimination by 12 percentage points. Rao also conducts a second ﬁeld experiment. He invites students to attend a play date at a school for poor students and elicit
incentivized measures of their willingness to accept. He ﬁnds that having poor classmates
makes students more willing to attend the play dates with poor children. In particular, it
reduced the average size of the incentive that is required to attend the play date by 19
percent. Having a poor study partner (e.g., contact alone) explains 70 percent of the increase in this “willingness to play.”
When Rao (2013) turns to how exposure to poor students affects prosocial behavior
and learning in the classroom, he ﬁnds that having poor classmates makes students more
prosocial, as measured by their history of volunteering for charitable causes at school, as
well as their behavior in dictator games conducted in the lab. The ﬁndings reveal that
exposure to poor students does not just make rich students more charitable toward the
poor; instead, it affects generosity and notions of fairness more generally. Finally, Rao
shows that exposure to poor classmates has limited effects on the wealthy students’ test
scores: while he detects marginally signiﬁcant but meaningful decreases in rich students’
English test scores, he ﬁnds no effects on Hindi or Math scores or on a combined index
over all subjects.
The studies reviewed previously suggest that intergroup contact is an effective tool
to reduce prejudice, even though more work remains to be done to ascertain the
speciﬁc conditions under which contact will be most effective. Yet, some recent
work in psychology (Dixon et al., 2012) suggests new angles through which the contact
hypothesis should be evaluated and, more speciﬁcally, the possibility that its impact on
the ultimate goal of achieving a more inclusive society might be less obvious than what
would immediately appear. One of the observations made under this new line of work
is that prior research on the contact hypothesis has paid little attention on how the minority group reacts to contact, with the focus being on how contact changes prejudice
level among majority group members. In this context, Dixon et al. (2012) mention a
few observational studies suggesting that, while majority group members may demand
more social change toward inclusiveness subsequent to intergroup contact, minority

Field Experiments on Discrimination

group members may actually become less demanding of social change, as they perceive
that discrimination and social injustice have lessened. A few recent studies (Saguy et al.,
2009; Dovidio et al., 2009; Glasford and Calcagno, 2012) provide lab results consistent
with this observational data, with minority group members under the contact condition
appearing lulled into believing that the majority group is more just minded than it really
is. If these effects are real, one can easily imagine how contact may backﬁre at the societal level, with the theoretically more powerful advocates for the minority group
(e.g., African-Americans at Ivy League Universities experiencing positive intergroup
contact) decreasing their level of political activism. At the very least, this provocative
new research in psychology suggests that future ﬁeld work on the intergroup contact
hypothesis should be more systematic in collecting evidence on how minority group
members react to contact and broadening the deﬁnition of a successful intervention
outcome.

4.3 Sociocognitive debiasing strategies
In the absence of direct contact, is it possible to teach individuals to become less biased
against the minority group?
We start with the discussion of a ﬁeld experiment in Rajasthan, India, which offers a
cautionary tale about how easy it might be to simply tell people to overcome their stereotypes. Banerjee et al. (2013) set up a large-scale randomized experiment designed to
test whether citizens can learn from others’ experiences about the quality of female
leaders. This is an environment where, we have already shown, there is a large bias
against the ability of women to be decision makers. Using high-quality street theater
troupes, they set up a street play followed by a discussion of the performance of local
leaders a few weeks ahead of the 2010 panchayat (local government) election.
Following up on the work we discussed previously in Section 4.1.2, which showed
that direct experience with a female leader does change attitude toward female leaders
(and willingness to vote for one), this study sought to test whether the process could be
accelerated by providing citizens objective information that, in fact, women and men
are about equally good at carrying out a key task in the local government. The experiment took place in 382 panchayats: in randomly selected ones, a street play emphasized
the importance of the local leader in making key decisions and encouraged citizens to
vote for a competent leader. It then showed information on the average performance of
all leaders in providing employment under the ﬂagship employment guarantee scheme.
In another group of villages, the play and the information were almost the same, but the
script of the play emphasized the fact that citizens are often biased against women
leaders but that women also can be good leaders. The statistics provided on leader performance were also disaggregated by gender (as it turns out, women do about as well as
men in the sample districts).

369

370

Handbook of Field Experiments

There are two main results: ﬁrst, the play and information campaign, when it does not
emphasize gender, does appear to move priors. More candidates enter and the incumbent
is less likely to enter and to win. For example, the incumbent vote share declines by 6
percentage points (or a remarkable 60 percent) in villages where the general campaign
was run. Moreover, the vote share for the incumbent become more sensitive to past performance in places where the gender-neutral campaign was run. Second, however, these
effects disappear in places where the campaign introduces the “gender” theme: in those
villages, there is very little effect of the intervention on any outcomes (including on the
probability that a female runs or wins or on the vote share for women). It is as if, when
citizens understood that the campaign was about convincing them to consider women,
they lost interest. These ﬁndings underscore the challenge of ﬁghting discrimination in an
environment where discrimination is rife.41
It is possible that this experiment failed because it did not pay enough attention to
the structure of the bias and ways to overcome it. Over the last 20 years, social
psychologists have designed and tested in the laboratory setting a series of strategies
to reduce bias and stereotypical thinking. These include (following the categorization
in Paluck and Green, 2009): consciousness raising; targeting emotions through
perspective taking; targeting value consistency and self-worth; expert opinion and
accountability interventions; as well as recategorization, decategorization, and crosscategorization techniques.
Consciousness-raising strategies are inspired by the large body of work (in particular
the IAT literature) suggesting that prejudice can operate without the person’s awareness
or endorsement of it. The most promising consciousness-raising strategies emerging from
the psychology literature to date include counter-stereotype training and approachavoidance training.
For example, in the study by Kawakami et al. (2000), lab subjects received extensive
training in negating speciﬁc stereotypical thinking toward elderly people and skinheads
(young individuals with closed cropped or shaven heads who typically wear heavy
boots, are often part of the working class, and stereotypically perceived as aggressive).
In the elderly stereotype negation condition, subjects were instructed to respond
“NO” on the trials in which they saw a picture of an elderly person paired with an
elderly stereotypic trait and “YES” when they saw a picture of an elderly person
with a nonstereotypic trait. In the skinhead stereotype negation condition, subjects
were to respond “NO” on trials in which they saw a picture of a skinhead paired
with a skinhead stereotypic trait and “YES” on trials in which they saw a picture of
41

Note that the effect of reservation in this sample on the probability that a woman runs or wins after the reservation is
canceled is still positive, as in West Bengal or Mumbai: so the results are not due to the fact that people in Rajasthan
are so hell bent against women that they cannot learn about them. It just appears they cannot learn about them from
this intervention.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

a skinhead paired with a nonstereotypic trait. Kawakami et al. (2000) show that such
training in negating stereotypes was able to reduce the stereotypical activation. These
results were obtained even when participants were no longer instructed to “not stereotype” and, importantly, for stereotypic traits that were not directly involved in the
negation training phase. This reduced activation level was still clearly visible 24 hours
following the training session.42
Dasgupta and Greenwald (2001) report on two experiments where they examined
whether exposure to pictures of admired and disliked exemplars can reduce automatic
preference for white over black Americans and younger over older people. In experiment 1, participants were exposed to either admired black (e.g., Denzel Washington)
and disliked white individuals (e.g., Jeffrey Dahmer), disliked black (e.g., Mike Tyson)
and admired white (e.g., Tom Hanks) individuals, or nonracial exemplars. Immediately
after exemplar exposure and 24 hours later, they completed an IAT that assessed
automatic racial attitudes and two explicit attitude measures. Exposure to admired
black and disliked white exemplars signiﬁcantly weakened automatic pro-white
attitudes for 24 hours beyond the treatment but did not affect explicit racial attitudes.
Experiment 2 provided a replication using automatic age-related attitudes. Also,
Wittenbrink et al. (1997) examined the effects of watching videos of AfricanAmericans situated either at a convivial outdoor barbecue or at a gang-related
incident. Situating African-Americans in a positive setting produced lower implicit
bias scores.
In a series of papers reviewed by Madva (2015), Kawakami and his colleagues have
also demonstrated how counter-stereotype training and approach-avoidance training
can reduce bias. For example, Kawakami et al. (2007a) perform a lab experiment where
subjects undergo gender counter-stereotype training by being asked to pair male faces
with words such as “sensitive” and female faces with words such as “strong.” The subjects
next evaluated four job applications (two with male names, two with female names) for a
position as “chairperson of a District Doctor’s Association.” Sixty-one percent of the subjects that had received counter-stereotype training chose a woman for the position,
compared to only 35% among the subjects that had not received the training.
In another experiment, Kawakami et al. (2007b) demonstrated the debiasing potential
of “approach-avoidance” conditioning. In this experiment, white and Asian participants
repeatedly pulled a joystick toward themselves when they saw black faces and pushed
it away when they saw white faces. The participants demonstrated reduced implicit
bias on the IAT subsequent to completing this training. Kawakami et al. (2008)
also showed that “approach-avoidance” conditioning training might be a promising
approach to deal with the stereotype threat: female undergraduates trained in repeatedly

42

Follow-up studies have partially replicated but also qualiﬁed the original ﬁndings. See Gawronski et al. (2008).

371

372

Handbook of Field Experiments

“approaching” math-related images (“e.g., calculators, equations”) subsequently showed
stronger preferences for math on implicit measures and answered more questions on a
math test. Forbes and Schmader (2010) replicated Kawakami et al. (2008) in a study
that allowed for a longer delay (24e30 hours) between the debiasing training and the
math test and also showed that counter-stereotype training seemed more effective
than approach-avoidance training in this context.43
Because emotional states can inﬂuence the expression of prejudice, psychologists have
hypothesized that interventions that encourage the perceiver to experience the emotions
of the minority group might be effective debiasing strategies. What does it feel like to
have your intelligence automatically questioned or to be trailed by detectives each
time you walk into a store? Perspective taking involves stepping into the shoes of a stereotyped person and can be useful in assessing the emotional impact on individuals who
are constantly being stereotyped in negative ways.
There are now multiple studies attesting to the merits of perspective taking as a strategy for reducing intergroup bias. Some have linked perspective taking to decreased activation and application of negative group stereotypes (Galinsky and Moskowitz, 2000;
Todd et al., 2011); others have shown that adopting the perspective of a particular
out-group target leads to more positive evaluations of other individual members of the
target’s group (Shih et al., 2009) and of the target’s group as a whole (Stephan and Finlay,
1999). For example, Todd et al. (2011) conducted a series of lab experiments examining
the impact of perspective taking on several outcomes: automatic evaluations, approachavoidance reactions, and behaviors displayed during face-to-face interactions. In one of
the experiments, participants watched a video depicting a series of discriminatory acts
directed toward a black man versus a white man. As they watched the video, participants
either adopted the black man’s perspective or they attempted to remain objective and
detached (control group). The researchers included two different perspective-taking conditions in this experiment. Some participants tried to imagine the black man’s thoughts,
feelings, and experiences (other condition) as they watched the video; others tried to
imagine their own thoughts, feelings, and experiences as if they were in the black
man’s situation (self-condition). After watching the video, participants completed a
variant of the IAT that assesses automatic evaluations of black relative to white

43

Interestingly, these effects were only observed when the task of choosing the best candidate came second, after the
trait evaluation. When this choice task was ﬁrst, only 37 percent of those who had undergone the training chose a
female candidate. A similar pattern emerged when the order of the tasks was switched, in that participants were
consistently biased on the ﬁrst task and debiased on the second, regardless of which task actually came ﬁrst. One
possible explanation for this effect is that participants seem to recognize that the researchers are trying to debias
them and then try to correct for this perceived inﬂuence by deliberately responding in more stereotypical ways, at
least at ﬁrst. Once they have an opportunity to explicitly counteract the debiasing, they stop trying to resist the
training and then the effects emerge. Subsequently, they respond in counterstereotypical ways.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Americans. Subjects in both of the perspective-taking conditions (other and self-conditions) exhibited signiﬁcantly weaker pro-white bias than the control subjects.
Strategies targeting value consistency and self-worth rely on the theory that individuals’ desire to maintain consistency between valued cognitions and behaviors or protect
their self-worth may be leveraged to lead them to repress their prejudice (Paluck and
Green, 2009). Debiasing strategies in this area have leveraged cognitive dissonance and
self-afﬁrmation theories. For example, in a lab experiment, Leippe and Eisenstadt
(1994) apply cognitive dissonance theory to get subjects to see prejudice as inconsistent
with their own values: college students softened their antiblack positions on social policies and reported more egalitarian attitudes and beliefs after agreeing to write a public
statement in favor of pro-black policies. Also, Fein and Spencer (1997) report that lab
subjects who have “self-afﬁrmed” by circling values that were most important to them
were more likely to give positive ratings to a Jewish job candidate.44
A body of research in social psychology suggests that prejudice and discrimination
might also be inﬂuenced by expert opinion and greater accountability to others for
one’s beliefs and behaviors. Levy, Stroessner, and Dweck (1998) show that telling lab
subjects that experts believe that personality is malleable reduces stereotyping against minority groups. Dobbs and Crano (2001) report that subjects allocated more points to a
ﬁctitious out group when they were required to justify their allocations to others; similarly, Bodenhausen et al. (1994) show that students involved in a school disciplinary case
were less likely to stereotype the student if they believed they would be accountable to
their peers for their evaluation of the case.
Individuating is another sociocognitive debiasing strategy that involves gathering very
speciﬁc information about a person’s background, tastes, hobbies, and family, so that
one’s judgments will be based on the particulars of that person, rather than on group
characteristics. This approach is grounded in the social identity and categorization
literature and essentially is a decategorization effort, where subjects are instructed to focus
on the individual rather than the group (Brewer, 1988; Fiske and Neuberg, 1990).
Lebrecht et al. (2009) provide an interesting take on the individuation exercise. In their
study, two groups of Caucasian subjects were exposed equally to the same AfricanAmerican faces in a training protocol run over ﬁve sessions. In the individuation condition, subjects learned to discriminate between African-American faces; speciﬁcally, they
received “expertise training” with other-race facesddeﬁned by the authors as a procedure that improves observers’ ability to individuate objects within the training domain and
hence reduce the degree to which other-race faces are stereotyped. In contrast, in the
categorization condition, subjects learned to categorize faces as African-American or
not. Subjects in the individuation condition, but not in the categorization condition,

44

Note that participants who were Jewish were excluded from this part of the study.

373

374

Handbook of Field Experiments

showed improved discrimination of African-American faces with training. Also, subjects
in the individuation condition, but not the categorization condition, showed a reduction
in their implicit racial bias. For the individuation condition only, the degree to which an
individual subject’s implicit racial bias decreased was signiﬁcantly correlated with the degree of improvement that the subject showed in their ability to differentiate AfricanAmerican faces.
Other debiasing strategies inspired by the social identity and categorization
literature include recategorization and crossed-categorization techniques, where participants are encouraged to think of people from different groups as part of one subordinate
group using cues such as same shirt colors or shared prizes, or participants are made aware
of their common membership in a third group. Such recategorization and cross-categorization efforts have shown some success in reducing favoritism for the in-group and
improving cooperation between groups (Dovidio and Gaertner, 2000; Gaertner et al.,
1999).
An exciting recent study in the sociocognitive debiasing area is by Lai et al. (2014),
who sought to determine the effectiveness of various methods for reducing implicit
bias. Structured as a research contest, teams of scholars were given 5 minutes in which
to enact interventions that they believed would reduce implicit preferences for whites
compared to blacks, as measured by an IAT, with the goal of attaining IAT scores that
reﬂect a lack of implicit preference for either of the two groups. Teams submitted 18 interventions that were tested approximately two times across three studies, totaling 11,868
non-black participants. Half of the interventions were effective at reducing the implicit
bias that favors whites over blacks. Most effective were the following interventions: (1)
participating in a sports game in which all of the teammates were black while the
opposing team was all white and engaged in unfair play and being subsequently instructed
to recall how their black teammates helped them while their white opponents did not; (2)
reading a graphic story in which one is asked to place oneself in the role of the victim who
is assaulted by a white man and rescued by a black man; and (3) practicing an IAT with
counterstereotypic black (e.g., Michael Jordan, Martin Luther King, Jr.) and counterstereotypic white (e.g., Timothy McVeigh, Jeffrey Dahmer) exemplars.
A concern one may have about the relevance of this lab evidence for the ﬁeld is that it
can only document fairly short-term effects (up to 24 hours) and hence might be of
limited relevance to the real world. However, even such a short time frame might be
relevant to some important decisions that have been shown to be subject to bias, such
as human resource managers’ decision on whether to pass on a given resume or teachers’
grading decisions. Therefore, we believe that even short-term effects could be of realworld relevance.
What this lab evidence does not allow us to assess, however, is how these short-term
impacts would differ if the same person (e.g., an HR manager) was repeatedly exposed to

Field Experiments on Discrimination

such debiasing strategies (e.g., every time he or she sits down to start reviewing resumes or
grading exams).
Some other debiasing work in psychology has taken seriously this concern about oneshot, short-term interventions and has asked whether related strategies can be built to
produce enduring reductions in bias. Work by Devine and a series of coauthors is of
particular interest. Devine (1989) proposes a habit-breaking approach to prejudice reduction and likens implicit biases to deeply entrenched habits developed through socialization experiences. “Breaking the habit” of implicit bias therefore requires learning
about the contexts that activate the bias and how to replace the biased responses with responses that reﬂect one’s nonprejudiced goals. Devine and Monteith (1993) and Plant
and Devine (2009) argue that the motivation to break the prejudice habit stems from
two sources. First, people must be aware of their biases and they must also be concerned
about the consequences of their biases before they will be motivated to exert effort to
eliminate them. Second, people need to know when biased responses are likely to occur
and how to replace those biased responses with ones more consistent with their goals.
Devine et al. (2012) develop and test a longer term intervention to help people reduce
implicit biases and “break the prejudice habit.” The participants were 91 non-black
introductory psychology students, who completed a 12-week longitudinal study for
course credit. The key elements of the intervention were as follows. First, to ensure
awareness of their bias, all participants completed a measure of implicit bias and received
feedback about their level of bias. People assigned to the treatment group were also presented with a bias education and training program, the goals of which were to evoke a
general concern about implicit biases and train people to eliminate them. The program
lasted 45 minutes. The education component likened the expression of implicit biases to
a habit and provided information linking implicit bias to discriminatory behaviors across a
wide range of settings (e.g., interpersonal, employment, health). The training component
described how to apply a variety of bias reduction strategies in daily life. The training section presented participants with a wide array of strategies (covering many of the strategies
discussed in the following section, such as taking the perspective of stigmatized others,
imagining counterstereotypic examples, training in negating stereotypical associations,
and individuation) as well as opportunities to engage in positive interactions with members of the minority group (e.g., intergroup contact). This enabled participants to ﬂexibly
choose the strategies most applicable to different situations in their lives.
Following the intervention, treated participants had lower IAT scores than control
group participants at 4 and 8 weeks after the intervention; moreover, the effects at 4
and 8 weeks were not systematically different from each other, indicating that the reduction in implicit race bias persisted over time. These data provide the ﬁrst evidence that a
controlled, randomized intervention can produce enduring reductions in implicit bias.
The intervention created no changes in the participants’ reported racial attitudes, but it
did affect participants’ concern about discrimination and their awareness of their personal

375

376

Handbook of Field Experiments

bias. Also, concerns about discrimination emerged as a moderator for the interventions’
effects. The intervention appears to have raised concerns about discrimination at week 2,
and the biggest reduction in implicit bias in the treatment group was among those subjects who experienced growing concerns.
Despite the large amount of both theoretical and lab-based work in psychology on
these various sociocognitive debiasing techniques, it is remarkable how few evaluations
of these techniques have been performed in the ﬁeld.
Paluck and Green (2009) perform a thorough literature search of the randomized ﬁeld
evidence on the debiasing techniques listed previously. While the number of ﬁeld experiments they identify is nontrivial (71), much of the work they survey is not directly
guided by the psychology literature or directory transposable into the speciﬁc lab-based
strategies reviewed previously. Moreover, very few of the existing ﬁeld studies are
designed to track changes in behavior outcome measures. The modal existing ﬁeld study
also involves a very short-term follow-up (often within the day) and takes place in a classroom setting with a student population, hence quite “lab-like” even if not explicitly in
the lab.
By far, most common have been interventions relying on various forms of entertainment (books, movies, cartoons, etc.) to create a persuasive narrative aimed at altering stereotypical thinking. In many cases though, the entertainment content is not based on the
speciﬁc psychological theories that have guided the lab work, and it is hence difﬁcult to
make a direct link between the lab and the ﬁeld evidence. For example, Paluck and
Green (2009) identify several randomized ﬁeld experiments performed in schools to
measure the impact of reading on prejudice. This work suggests reduction in selfreported bias associated with reading content that portrays contact between children
who are similar to the studied population and children of different race (e.g., intergroup
friendship), as well as reading content that emphasizes a minority characters’ individual
characteristics rather than group membership (e.g., individuating). But is also possible
that reading interventions might be effective because of the emotional reaction they
induce through perspective taking (e.g., putting oneself in the shoes of the minority character in a book) or because they are a channel to communicate social norms (e.g., descriptions of what others are doing and hence what the reader should do).
Paluck and Green (2009) also identify a few instruction-based (rather than narrative
based) ﬁeld interventions. In this case again, though, the content of the interventions is
rarely directly guided by the lab evidence, and a lack of theoretical foundations may
explain in part a lack of impressive ﬁndings. One exception is the study by Lustig
(2003), which evaluates a training program in Israel that aims to encourage perspective
taking and empathy to reduce prejudice against Palestinians among Jewish 12th graders.
Lustig (2003) reports encouraging ﬁndings among Jewish students who were asked to
write an essay about the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict from the Palestinian viewpoint.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

The randomized ﬁeld studies designed to directly test consciousness raising, value
consistency, and self-worth, as well as recategorization, decategorization and crosscategorization techniques can essentially be counted on one hand.45 All have been
performed on student populations and have produced mixed results.
At the same time, we are conﬁdent that hundreds of antiprejudice interventions
directly inspired by the lab-based literature described previously must be taking place
yearly not only in schools but also in business and government settings but are not being
rigorously evaluated. It would be of ﬁrst-order importance for researchers to strike up
partnerships with organizations interested in better understanding the value of the diversity training programs they are investing resources in, both in terms of their immediate
impact on bias and their ultimate impact on organizational performance. Human
resource departments, police departments, and courtrooms are only a few of the possible
real-world settings where a much-needed ﬁeld validation of this large lab-based literature
could be performed.
For example, the US Department of Justice is funding the development of a curriculum
for police staff that reﬂects on the Fair and Impartial Policing perspective. This training program applies the modern science of bias to policing: it trains ofﬁcers on the effect of implicit
bias and gives them the information and skills they need to reduce and manage their biases.
The curriculum addresses not just racial/ethnic bias but biases based on other factors such as
gender, sexual orientation, religion, socioeconomic status, etc. Ofﬁcers are taught skills,
inspired by the lab-tested methods described previously to reduce and manage their own
biases. Social psychologists from around the nation who conduct the research on human
biases are members of the team that help design the curriculum. While this program has
been implemented with various target audiences (recruits/patrol ofﬁcers, ﬁrst-line supervisors, mid-level managers, command staff, and law enforcement trainers), to our knowledge,
it has not been the subject of a rigorous evaluation.
As another example, there has been much discussion in the recent years about how
the sociodebiasing techniques described previously could be used to debias judges and
jurors. Kang et al. (2012) discuss possible ways to import these techniques to the courtroom. They argue that:
In chambers and the courtroom buildings, photographs, posters, screen savers, pamphlets, and
decorations ought to be used that bring to mind counter-typical exemplars or associations for
participants in the trial processdfor jurors, then,dhe hope would be that by reminding them
of counter-typical associations, we might momentarily activate different mental patterns while
in the courthouse and reduce the impact of implicit biases on their decision-making.

45

See Houlette et al. (2004) for recategorization, Rokeach (1971, 1973) for value consistency, Katz and Zalk (1978)
and Katz (2000) for cognitive retraining, and Lustig (2003) for perspective taking.

377

378

Handbook of Field Experiments

Also, Elek and Agor (2014) show how debiasing strategies could be feasibly brought
to the courtroom with simple alterations to the standard instructions delivered by the
judge to the jury, such as including a recognition of the universality of bias and explicit
encouragement of perspective taking.

4.4 Technological debiasing
Stanovich and West (2000) put forward an important distinction between System 1 and
System 2 cognitive functioning. System 1 corresponds to intuitive reasoning, which tends
to be fast, implicit, and emotional. In contrast, System 2 reasoning tends to be slower,
more explicit, and more logical. In situations where we know that implicit biases are
likely to prop up, such as when evaluating diverse candidates for a job posting, relying
exclusively on System 1 might be dangerous.
Prior research has shown conditions under which System 1 reasoning is more likely to
occur. Ambiguous or unfamiliar situations tend to be associated with System 1: without
concrete criteria for decision-making, individuals will rely on the information that is
most easily accessible, including stereotypes, to make decisions (Dovidio and Gaertner,
2000; Johnson et al., 1995). Emotional states such as anger or disgust have also been
shown to induce more bias against minority group members, even if those emotions
were not triggered by the minority group members themselves or directly related to
the decision-making situation (DeSteno et al., 2004; Dasgupta et al., 2009). Interesting,
even happiness has been shown to produce more stereotypic judgments, though the
exact mechanism for this is unclear (Bodenhausen et al., 1994). Importantly, states of
fatigue, time pressure, heavy workload, stress, emergencies, or distraction also trigger
more System 1 reasoning and more stereotypic judgments (Eells and Showalter, 1994;
Hartley and Adams, 1974; Keinan, 1987; Van Knippenberg et al., 1999; Bodenhausen
and Lichtenstein, 1987; Gilbert and Hixon, 1991; Sherman et al., 1998).
For instance, Correll et al. (2002) have used videogames in the lab to assess the effect
of race on shoot/do not shoot decisions of targets who are either holding guns or holding
nonthreatening objects. While all subjects are instructed to shoot the armed targets but
not shoot the unarmed targets, subjects make errors and these errors are systematically
correlated with the race of the target: they disproportionately shoot unarmed Blacks
and do not shoot armed Whites. Subsequent work has shown this “shooter bias” to be
more prevalent in situations where subjects are tired (Ma et al., 2013), rushed (Payne,
2006), or cannot see well (Payne et al., 2005).
The ﬁeld study by Danziger et al. (2011) of parole decisions made by judges provides
another interesting illustration. They study a sample of 1112 parole board hearings in
Israeli prisons over a 10-month period. The rulings are made by eight experienced
JewisheIsraeli judges, with each judge considering between 14 and 35 cases each
day and spending around 6 min on each decision. The judges take two food breaks,
hence dividing their day into three sessions. Danziger et al. (2011) ﬁnd that the

Field Experiments on Discrimination

percentage of favorable rulings drops from 65% to nearly zero within each decision
session, returning to 65% after a food break. The researchers attribute their results to
the repeated task draining the judges’ mental resources: when drained, the judges start
opting for the easy default option, which is to deny parole. Taking a food break helps
to replenish the judges’ energy. However, the researchers did not ﬁnd any evidence
that the timing of the decision within each session affected discrimination, either based
on gender and ethnicity or the severity of the crime.
Casey et al. (2012) study how one could build on this knowledge of what triggers
System 1 versus System 2 thinking to help technologically debias the courtroom. For
example, the authors discuss how jurors might be allowed more time on cases in which
implicit bias might be a concern by, for example, spending more time reviewing the facts
of the case before committing to a decision. Also, courts may review situations where
judges and other decision-makers are likely to be overburdened and consider options
(e.g., reorganizing court calendars) to provide more time for decision-making. Also,
jurors may be asked to commit to decision-making criteria before reviewing a case.
Furthermore, courtrooms could consider using judges with special expertise to handle
more ambiguous cases. Many of the possible strategies that Casey et al. (2012) discuss
for the courtroom setting could naturally be applied to other real-world settings where
biases in decision-making have been documented.
When historical data on inputs and outcomes associated with a particular decision
process are available (e.g., whether or not to grant parole to a prisoner), another strategy
for moving toward System 2 reasoning might be to construct statistical models that will
automatically map inputs (e.g., past criminal history) into a forecast about the relevant
outcome (e.g., likelihood of recidivism). Such statistical models can produce predictions
that outperform those of experts (Dawes, 1971).46 As importantly, the use of simple statistical models or more complex machine learning models may equip decision-makers
with a tool that will help debias their choices. More research should be devoted to testing
the feasibility of this approach across a variety of domains.
With better knowledge of why discrimination occurs in a particular setting, it will
become easier to design appropriate technological debiasing strategies. As we discussed
earlier in Section 2.5, Bartos et al. (2013) convincingly demonstrate racial gaps in attention allocation by HR managers. Once they see a minority name on a resume, they pay
less attention to that resume. These ﬁndings conﬁrm the merit of requiring separate rankings of applicants from nonminority and minority groups (or across gender lines) followed by a comparison of leading candidates across the groups. One can think of this
rule as providing quotas in the preselection process. We do not know of any systematic
evaluation of such a strategy.
46

The value of linear models in hiring, admissions, and selection decisions are highlighted by research that Moore et al.
(2010) conducted on the interpretation of grades by graduate admission ofﬁcers.

379

380

Handbook of Field Experiments

Also, since the earlier a decision maker learns a group attribute, such as name, the
larger the asymmetry in attention to subsequent information such as education or qualiﬁcation, the ﬁndings by Bartos et al. (2013) strengthens the case for suppressing the signals of a group attribute during the part of the selection process. This particular
technological approach has been receiving quite a lot of attention from policymakers
in the recent years and has been evaluated in the ﬁeld. In particular, the large number
of correspondence studies have raised interest in the possibility of using “blind” hiring
procedures. In some recruiting circumstances, the full hiring process can take place anonymously. Goldin and Rouse (2000) famously showed that American orchestras conducting blind auditions hired more women. In most other cases, though, only the ﬁrst
stage of the recruitment is made anonymous: this is the case in anonymous application
procedures, such as the masking of identifying characteristics in resumes at the ﬁrst selection stage.
In several European countries, pilot studies of the impact of such anonymization of
resumes have been conducted, including relatively large-scale ﬁeld experiments in
France, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Germany. These experiments are summarized
in the study by Krause et al. (2012b). Only a subset were truly randomized, and we focus
our discussion on this subset.47
In 2010, 2011, the French government initiated an experiment, which was implemented by the French public employment service. It involved about 1000 ﬁrms in eight
local labor markets, and it lasted in total for about 10 months (Behaghel et al., 2014).
Among volunteer ﬁrms, resumes were either transmitted anonymously or nonanonymously. The experiment’s main ﬁndings can be summarized as follows. First, women
beneﬁt from higher call-back rates with anonymous job applicationsdat least if they
compete with male applicants for a job. Second, and most interestingly, migrants and residents of deprived neighborhoods suffer from anonymous job applications. Their callback rates are lower with anonymous job applications than with standard applications.
This adverse effect on minority candidates is the exact opposite effect to what policymakers had hoped, and a surprising result given existing evidence from correspondence
testing in France (Duguet et al., 2010), which shows discrimination against minority

47

Åslund and Skans (2012) analyze an experiment conducted in parts of the local administration of the Swedish city of
Gothenburg between 2004 and 2006. Based on a difference-in-differences approach, the authors ﬁnd that anonymous job applications increase the chances of an interview invitation for both women and applicants of non-Western
origin when compared to standard applications. These increased chances for minority candidates in the ﬁrst stage also
translated into a higher job offer arrival rate for women but not for migrants. In the Netherlands, two experiments
took place in the public administration of one major Dutch city in 2006 and 2007 (Bøg and Kranendonk, 2011). The
experiments focused on ethnic minorities. The lower call-back rate for minority candidates with standard applications disappears with anonymous job applications. With regard to job offers, however, the authors do not detect any
differences between minority and majority candidatesdirrespective of whether or not their resumes are treated
anonymously.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

candidates for some jobs, no discrimination for others, but never discrimination against
majority candidates. Behaghel et al. (2014) explain these surprising results by the selfselection of ﬁrms that agreed to participate in the ﬁeld experiment. Among ﬁrms that
were contacted to participate in the experiment, 62 percent accepted the invitation.
While participating ﬁrms were very similar to refusing ﬁrms in most observable dimensions, there was one signiﬁcant exception: participating ﬁrms tended to interview and
hire relatively more minority candidates (when using standard resumes). The anonymization therefore prevented selected ﬁrms from treating minority candidates more favorably
during the experiment. Hence, the results of the experiment cannot be viewed as representative of what anonymization might have achieved if it had been mandated to all
ﬁrms. Methodologically, this paper offers a valuable illustration of one danger when
trying to generalize the ﬁndings of a ﬁeld experiment. External validity is far from guaranteed if there is sizable room for selection or self-selection of subjects into the experiment (Heckman, 1992; Allcott, 2015).
Another large-scale randomized ﬁeld experiment took place in Germany in early
2010 (Krause et al., 2012a). The publication of a correspondence testing study for
Germany (Kaas and Manger, 2012) triggered a lively public debate about discrimination
in the hiring decisions of German ﬁrms.48 Against this background, the Federal
Anti-Discrimination Agency initiated a ﬁeld experiment with anonymous job
applications in Germany to investigate their potential in combating hiring discrimination. This experiment was also subject to selection in participation, with eight organizations voluntarily joining the experiment. The characteristics that were made
anonymous include the applicant’s name and contact details, gender, nationality, date
and place of birth, disability, marital status, and the applicant’s picture.49 Unlike the
French study, the authors ﬁnd that the anonymization leads to less discrimination
against minority groups. Moreover, anonymizing applications is not too difﬁcult
administratively, with standardized application forms that are completed by the
applicants appearing as the most effective and efﬁcient way to make applications
anonymous.

48

49

The study ﬁnds that applicants with a Turkish-sounding name are on average 14 percentage points less likely to
receive an invitation for a job interview than applicants with a German-sounding name who are otherwise similar. In
small- and medium-sized ﬁrms, this difference is even larger and amounts to 24 percentage points.
The study was further designed to assess the practicality of different methods to remove identiﬁers from applications;
practicality was assessed from interviews with the HR specialists at the ﬁrms. Four methods were considered: (1)
standardized application forms in which sensitive information is not included; (2) reﬁnements of existing online
application forms such that sensitive information is disabled; (3) copying applicant’s nonsensitive information into
another document; and (4) blacking out sensitive information in the original application documents.

381

382

Handbook of Field Experiments

5. CONCLUSION
We have organized this chapter along three overarching themes: the measurement of
discrimination, the consequences of discrimination, and factors and policies that may
help undermine it. It is apparent from our review of the existing ﬁeld experiments under
each of these themes that there remain more unanswered or unexplored questions than
there are settled ones.
By far, the bulk of the ﬁeld experiments that have been conducted in this area relate to
the measurement of discrimination using the correspondence method. This body of
work has demonstrated how remarkably pervasive the differential treatment of minority
groups is throughout the world (at least in the labor market and rental market). These
studies, most often focusing on a single minority group in a single country, have been
important in generating debates in the local media and local public opinion and, from
that perspective, each has added value. In many ﬁelds of inquiry, researchers shy away
from replication, but this is refreshingly not the case heredmost likely because demonstrating differential treatment in the given country seemed a sufﬁciently important goal.
On the other hand, researchers’ ability to push the correspondence method further to go
beyond pure measurement of differential treatment has been more limited. Disappointingly, there has been minimal methodological innovation in the way correspondence
studies are being carried out. The main innovation might have been in leveraging the
method to study differential treatment across other characteristics than race, gender, or
ethnicity, such as in the set of recent studies using the method to study discrimination
against the long-term unemployed. While one might conclude from this that the correspondence method might have reached its full potential, recent papers such as by Bartos
et al. (2013) which demonstrate how it can used to study the dynamics of discrimination
(endogenous attention allocation in this case) suggest there remain unexplored avenues
for more creative uses.
Perhaps, because so much of economists’ attention has been devoted to using ﬁeld experiments to measure the extent of discrimination, there has been much less activity in
designing creative ways to better document either its consequences or ways to undermine
it. The dearth of ﬁeld-based evidence on these last two themes is particularly striking given
the rich theoretical and lab-based literature (mainly in psychology) that such work could
build upon. On the topic of consequence of discrimination, we are heartened to see a few
recent papers such as the study by Glover et al. (2015) that develop a creative ﬁeld design to
demonstrate how discrimination can be self-perpetuating. We believe that the last theme
in our chapter, interventions to undermine discrimination, is particularly ripe for more ﬁeld
experimentation. It is striking that most of the research in economics on this question has
centered around the contact hypothesis and exposure effects, while so many other strategies to debias people have been proposed by psychologists and evaluated in the lab. We
strongly encourage researchers to take on this work in the near future. Creating more

Field Experiments on Discrimination

partnerships with organizations that are willing to provide the testing ground for different
debiasing strategies will be particularly useful for this work to move forward. More generally, while ﬁeld experiments in the last decade have been instrumental in documenting the
prevalence of discrimination, ﬁeld experiments in the future decade should aim to play as
large of a role in isolating effective methods to combat it.

REFERENCES
Abrevaya, J., Hamermesh, D.S., 2012. Charity and favoritism in the ﬁeld: are female economists nicer (to
each other)? Rev. Econ. Statistics 94 (1), 202e207.
Acquisti, A., Fong, C.M., 2013. An Experiment in Hiring Discrimination via Online Social Networks.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2031979. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract¼2031979.
Ahern, K.R., Dittmar, A.K., 2012. The changing of the boards: the impact on ﬁrm valuation of mandated
female board representation. Q. J. Econ. 127 (1), 137e197.
Ahmed, A.M., Hammarstedt, M., 2008. Discrimination in the rental housing market: a ﬁeld experiment on
the internet. J. Urban Econ. 64 (2), 362e372.
Ahmed, A.M., Hammarstedt, M., 2009. Detecting discrimination against homosexuals: evidence from a ﬁeld
experiment on the internet. Economica 76 (303), 588e597.
Ahmed, A.M., Andersson, L., Hammarstedt, M., 2010. Can discrimination in the housing market be reduced
by increasing the information about the applicants? Land Econ. 86 (1), 79e90.
Ahmed, A.M., Andersson, L., Hammarstedt, M., 2012. Does age matter for employability? A ﬁeld experiment on ageism in the Swedish labour market. Appl. Econ. Lett. 19 (4), 403e406.
Ahmed, A.M., Andersson, L., Hammarstedt, M., 2013. Are gay men and lesbians discriminated against in the
hiring process? South. Econ. J. 79 (3), 565e585.
Aigner, D.J., Cain, G.G., 1977. Statistical theories of discrimination in labor markets. Industrial Labor Relat.
Rev. 175e187.
Alesina, A., Ferrara, E.L., 2005. Ethnic diversity and economic performance. J. Econ. Literature 43,
762e800.
Allcott, H., 2015. Site selection bias in program evaluation. Q. J. Econ. 130 (3).
Allport, G.W., 1954. The Nature of Prejudice. Addison-Wesley, Cambridge, MA.
Altonji, J.G., Blank, R.M., 1999. Chapter 48: race and gender in the labor market. Handb. Labor Econ. 3
(C), 3143e3259.
Arkes, H.R., Tetlock, P.E., 2004. Attributions of implicit prejudice, or “would Jesse Jackson ‘fail’ the implicit association test?”. Psychol. Inq. 15 (4), 257e278.
Aronson, J., Fried, C.B., Good, C., 2002. Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American
college students by shaping theories of intelligence. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38 (2), 113e125.
Arrow, K.J., 1973. The theory of discrimination. Discrimination Labor Mark. 3 (10), 3e33.
Åslund, O., Nordstr€
oum Skans, O., 2012. Do anonymous job application procedures level the playing ﬁeld?
Industrial Labor Relat. Rev. 65 (1), 82e107.
Ayres, I., Siegelman, P., 1995. Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new car. Am. Econ. Rev.
85 (3), 304e321.
Babad, E.Y., Inbar, J., Rosenthal, R., 1982. Pygmalion, Galatea, and the Golem: investigations of biased and
unbiased teachers. J. Educ. Psychol. 74 (4), 459.
Baert, S., Cockx, B., Gheyle, N., Vandamme, C., 2013. Do employers discriminate less if vacancies are difﬁcult to ﬁll? Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. In: IZA Discussion Paper, pp. 1e30.
Bagues, M., Perez-Villadoniga, M.J., 2012. Do recruiters prefer applicants with similar skills? Evidence from
a randomized natural experiment. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 82 (1), 12e20.
Bagues, M., Zinovyeva, N., 2015. The role of connections in academic promotions. Am. Econ. J. Appl.
Econ. 7 (2), 264e292.
Bagues, M., Sylos-Labini, M., Zinovyeva, N., 2014. Do gender quotas pass the test? Evidence from academic
evaluations in Italy. In: Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, LEM Working Paper Series, vol. 14.

383

384

Handbook of Field Experiments

Bagues, M.F., Esteve-Volart, B., 2010. Can gender parity break the glass ceiling? Evidence from a repeated
randomized experiment. Rev. Econ. Stud. 77 (4), 1301e1328.
Bailey, J., Wallace, M., Wright, B., 2013. Are gay men and lesbians discriminated against when applying for
jobs? A four-city, internet-based ﬁeld experiment. J. Homosex. 60 (6), 873e894.
Baldini, M., Federici, M., 2011. Ethnic discrimination in the Italian rental housing market. J. Hous. Econ. 20
(1), 1e14.
Banaji, M., Nosek, B.A., Greenwald, A.G., 2004. No place for Nostalgia in science: a response to Arkes and
Tetlock. Psychol. Inq. 15 (4), 279e310.
Banaji, M.R., Greenwald, A.G., 1995. Implicit gender stereotyping in judgments of fame. J. Personality Soc.
Psychol. 68 (2), 181.
Banerjee, A., Pande, R., 2009. Parochial politics: ethnic preferences and politician corruption. In: CEPR
Discussion Paper No. DP6381.
Banerjee, A., Bertrand, M., Datta, S., Mullainathan, S., 2009. Labor market discrimination in Delhi: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. J. Comp. Econ. 37 (1), 14e27.
Banerjee, A., Green, D., Green, J., Pande, R., 2010. Can Voters Be Primed to Choose Better Legislators?
Experimental Evidence from Rural India. Unpublished manuscript, available at:http://www.
povertyactionlab.org/node/2764.
Banerjee, A., Duﬂo, E., Imbert, C., Pande, R., 2013. Entry, exit, and candidate selection: evidence from
India. In: Mimeo, 3ie Grantee Final Report.
Bardhan, P.K., Mookherjee, D., Torrado, M.P., 2010. Impact of political reservations in West Bengal local
governments on anti-poverty targeting. J. Glob. Dev. 1 (1).
Bartos, V., Bauer, M., Chytilova, J., Matejka, F., 2013. Attention discrimination: theory and ﬁeld experiments. In: CERGE Working Paper, 1211-3298.
Beaman, L., Chattopadhyay, R., Duﬂo, E., Pande, R., Topalova, P., 2009. Powerful women: does exposure
reduce bias? Q. J. Econ. 124 (4), 1497e1540.
Beaman, L., Duﬂo, E., Pande, R., Topalova, P., 2010. Political reservation and substantive representation:
evidence from Indian village councils. In: Berry, S., Bosworth, B., Panagariya, A. (Eds.), India Policy
Forum 2010e11, Volume 7. SAGE Publications Inc.
Beaman, L., Duﬂo, E., Pande, R., Topalova, P., 2012. Female leadership raises aspirations and educational
attainment for girls: a policy experiment in India. Science 335 (6068), 582e586.
Becker, G.S., 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.
Behaghel, L., Crepon, B., Barbanchon, T.L., 2014. Unintended effects of anonymous resumes. In: CEPR
Discussion Paper No. DP10215.
Benjamin, D.J., Choi, J.J., Joshua Strickland, A., 2010. Social identity and preferences. Am. Econ. Rev. 100,
1913e1928.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2004. Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A ﬁeld
experiment on labor market discrimination. Am. Econ. Rev. 94 (4), 991e1013.
Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: the effect of managers on ﬁrm policies. Q. J. Econ. 118
(4), 1169e1208.
Bertrand, M., Chugh, D., Mullainathan, S., 2005. Implicit discrimination. Am. Econ. Rev. 94e98.
Besley, T., Coate, S., 1997. An economic model of representative democracy. Q. J. Econ. 85e114.
Besley, T.J., Folke, O., Persson, T., Rickne, J., 2013. Gender quotas and the crisis of the mediocre man:
theory and evidence from Sweden. In: IFN Working Paper.
Betz, D.E., Sekaquaptewa, D., 2012. My fair Physicist? Feminine math and science role models demotivate
young girls. Soc. Psychol. Personality Sci. 3 (6), 738e746.
Bhavnani, R.R., 2009. Do electoral quotas work after they are withdrawn? Evidence from a natural experiment in India. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 103 (01), 23.
Biddle, J.E., Hamermesh, D.S., 1998. Beauty, productivity and discrimination: lawyers’ looks and lucre. J.
Labor Econ. 15, 172e201.
Blackwell, L.S., Trzesniewski, K.H., Dweck, C.S., 2007. Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: a longitudinal study and an intervention. Child. Dev. 78 (1),
246e263.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Blommaert, L., Coenders, M., van Tubergen, F., 2014. Discrimination of Arabic-named applicants in The
Netherlands: an internet-based ﬁeld experiment examining different phases in online recruitment
procedures. Soc. Forces 92 (3), 957e982.
Bodenhausen, G.V., Lichtenstein, M., 1987. Social stereotypes and information-processing strategies: the
impact of task complexity. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 52 (5), 871.
Bodenhausen, G.V., Kramer, G.P., S€
usser, K., 1994. Happiness and stereotypic thinking in social judgment.
J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 66 (4), 621.
Bøg, M., Kranendonk, E., 2011. Labor market discrimination of minorities? Yes, but not in job offers. In:
MPRA Paper No. 33332.
Boisjoly, J., Duncan, G.J., Kremer, M., Levy, D.M., Eccles, J., 2006. Empathy or antipathy? The impact of
diversity. Am. Econ. Rev. 96 (5), 1890e1905.
Booth, A., Leigh, A., 2010. Do employers discriminate by gender? A ﬁeld experiment in female-dominated
occupations. Econ. Lett. 107 (2), 236e238.
Booth, A.L., Leigh, A., Varganova, E., 2011. Does ethnic discrimination vary across minority groups?
Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Oxf. Bull. Econ. Statistics 74 (4), 547e573.
Bosch, M., Angeles Carnero, M., Farre, L., 2010. Information and discrimination in the rental housing market: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Regional Sci. Urban Econ. 40 (1), 11e19.
Boschini, A., Muren, A., Persson, M., 2009. Constructing Gender in the Economics Lab. Technical report.
Stockholm University, Department of Economics.
Brewer, M.B., 1981. Ethnocentrism and its role in interpersonal trust. Sci. Inq. Soc. Sci. 214.
Brewer, M.B., 1988. A dual process model of impression formation. In: Wyer, R., Srull, T. (Eds.), Advances
in Social Cognition, vol. 1. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 1e36.
Broder, I.E., 1993. Review of NSF economics proposals: gender and institutional patterns. Am. Econ. Rev.
964e970.
Brown, C., Gay, P., 1985. Racial Discrimination: 17 Years After the Act. Policy Studies Institute.
Burns, J., Corno, L., La Ferrara, E., 2015. Interaction, Prejudice and Performance. Evidence from South
Africa. Working Paper.
Bursell, M., 2007. What’s in a name? A ﬁeld experiment test for the existence of ethnic discrimination in the
hiring process. SULCIS WP 7.
Carlsson, M., 2011. Does hiring discrimination cause gender segregation in the Swedish labor market? Fem.
Econ. 17 (3), 71e102.
Carlsson, M., Eriksson, S., 2014. Discrimination in the rental market for apartments. J. Hous. Econ. 23, 41e54.
Carpusor, A.G., Loges, W.E., 2006. Rental discrimination and ethnicity in names. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 36
(4), 934e952.
Casey, P.M., Warren, R.K., Cheesman, F.L., Elek, J.K., 2012. Helping Courts Address Implicit Bias. Technical report. National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.
Charles, K.K., Guryan, J., 2008. Prejudice and wages: an empirical assessment of Becker’s “the economics of
discrimination”. J. Political Econ. 116 (5), 773e809.
Chattopadhyay, R., Duﬂo, E., 2004. Women as policy makers: evidence from a randomized experiment in
India. Econometrica 72, 1409e1443.
Cheryan, S., Oliver Siy, J., Vichayapai, M., Drury, B.J., Kim, S., 2011. Do female and male role models who
embody STEM stereotypes hinder women’s anticipated success in STEM? Soc. Psychol. Personality Sci.
2 (6), 656e664.
Clots-Figueras, I., 2009. Are Female Leaders Good for Education? Evidence from India. Universidad Carlos
III de Madrid, Mimeo.
Clots-Figueras, I., 2011. Women in politics: evidence from the Indian states. J. Public Econ. 95 (7e8),
664e690.
Coate, S., Loury, G., 1993. Antidiscrimination enforcement and the problem of patronization. Am. Econ.
Rev. 92e98.
Coffman, K.B., Coffman, L.C., Keith, M., 2013. Marzilli Ericson. The size of the LGBT population and the
magnitude of anti-gay sentiment are substantially underestimated. In: NBER Working Paper No.
19508.

385

386

Handbook of Field Experiments

Cohen, G.L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Master, A., 2006. Reducing the racial achievement gap: a social-psychological intervention. Science 313 (5791), 1307e1310.
Cohen, G.L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P., 2009. Recursive processes in selfafﬁrmation: intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science 324 (5925), 400e403.
Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C.M., Wittenbrink, B., 2002. The police Ofﬁcer’s dilemma: using ethnicity to
disambiguate potentially threatening individuals. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 83 (6), 1314e1329.
Cross, H., Kenney, G., Mell, J., Zimmerman, W., 1990. Employer hiring practices: differential treatment of
Hispanic and Anglo job seekers. In: Urban Institute Report 90-4.
Danziger, S., Levav, J., Avnaim-Pesso, L., 2011. Extraneous factors in judicial decisions. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 108 (17), 6889e6892.
Dasgupta, N., Asgari, S., 2004. Seeing is believing: exposure to counterstereotypic women leaders
and its effect on the malleability of automatic gender stereotyping. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 40 (5),
642e658.
Dasgupta, N., Greenwald, A.G., 2001. On the malleability of automatic attitudes: combating automatic prejudice with images of admired and disliked individuals. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 81 (5), 800.
Dasgupta, N., DeSteno, D., Williams, L.A., Hunsinger, M., 2009. Fanning the ﬂames of prejudice: the inﬂuence of speciﬁc incidental emotions on implicit prejudice. Emotion 9 (4), 585.
Dawes, R.M., 1971. A case study of graduate admissions: application of three principles of human decision
making. Am. Psychol. 26, 180e188.
Dee, T.S., 2009. Stereotype Threat and the Student-Athlete. NBER Working Paper No. 14705.
DeSteno, D., Dasgupta, N., Bartlett, M.Y., Cajdric, A., 2004. Prejudice from thin air: the effect of emotion
on automatic intergroup attitudes. Psychol. Sci. 15 (5), 319e324.
Devine, P.G., 1989. Stereotypes and prejudice: their automatic and controlled components. J. Personality
Soc. Psychol. 56, 5e18.
Devine, P.G., Monteith, M.J., 1993. The role of discrepancy-associated affect in prejudice reduction. In:
Mackie, D.M., Hamilton, D.L. (Eds.), Affect, Cognition, and Stereotyping: Interactive Processes in
Group Perception. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 317e344.
Devine, P.G., Forscher, P.S., Austin, A.J., Cox, W.T.L., 2012. Long-term reduction in implicit race bias: a
prejudice habit-breaking intervention. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48 (6), 1267e1278.
Dickson, E.S., Scheve, K., 2006. Social identity, political speech, and electoral competition. J. Theor. Polit.
18 (1), 5e39.
Dixon, J., Levine, M., Reicher, S., Durrheim, K., 2012. Beyond prejudice: are negative evaluations the
problem and is getting us to like one another more the solution? Behav. Brain Sci. 35 (6), 411e425.
Dobbs, M., Crano, W.D., 2001. Outgroup accountability in the minimal group Paradigm: implications for
aversive discrimination and social identity theory. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 27, 355e364.
Doleac, J.L., Stein, L.C.D., 2013. The visible hand: race and online market outcomes. Econ. J. 123 (572),
F469eF492.
Dovidio, J.F., 2001. On the nature of contemporary prejudice: the third wave. J. Soc. Issues 57 (4), 829e849.
Dovidio, J.F., Gaertner, S.L., 2000. Aversive racism and selection decisions: 1989 and 1999. Psychol. Sci. 11
(4), 315e319.
Dovidio, J.F., Gaertner, S.L., Isen, A.M., Rust, M., Guerra, P., 1998a. Positive affect, cognition, and the
reduction of intergroup bias. In: Sedikides, C., Schopler, J., Insko, C.A. (Eds.), Intergroup Cognition
and Intergroup Behavior. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 337e366.
Dovidio, J.F., Gaertner, S.L., Validzic, A., 1998b. Intergroup bias: status, differentiation, and a common ingroup identity. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 75 (1), 109.
Dovidio, J.F., Gaertner, S.L., Saguy, T., 2009. Commonality and the complexity of “We”: social attitudes
and social change. Personality Soc. Psychol. Rev. 13 (1), 3e20.
Droitcour, J., Caspar, R.A., Hubbard, M.L., Ezzati, T.M., 1991. The item count technique as a method of
indirect questioning: a review of its development and a case study application. In: Beimer, P.B.,
Groves, R.M., Lyberg, L.E., Mathiowetz, N.A., Sudman, S. (Eds.), Measurement Errors in Surveys.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Hoboken, NJ, pp. 185e211.
Duguet, E., Leandri, N., horty, Y.L., Petit, P., 2010. Are young French jobseekers of ethnic immigrant
origin discriminated against? A controlled experiment in the Paris area. Ann. Econ. Statistics 187e215.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Dunning, T., Nilekani, J., 2013. Ethnic quotas and political mobilization: caste, parties, and distribution in
indian village councils. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 107 (01), 35e56.
Dusek, J.B., Hall, V.C., Meyer, W.J., 1985. Teacher Expectations. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale,
NJ.
Eagly, A.H., Karau, S.J., 2002. Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female leaders. Psychol. Rev. 109
(3), 573.
Eagly, A.H., Makhijani, M.G., Klonsky, B.G., 1992. Gender and the evaluation of leaders: a meta-analysis.
Psychol. Bull. 111 (1), 3.
Eden, D., 1992. Leadership and expectations: pygmalion effects and other self-fulﬁlling prophecies in
organizations. Leadersh. Q. 3 (4), 271e305.
Eden, D., Ravid, G., 1982. Pygmalion vs. Self-Expectancy: effects of instructor- and self-expectancy on
trainee performance. Organ. Behav. Hum. Perform. 30, 351e364.
Eden, D., Shani, A.B., 1982. Pygmalion goes to boot camp: expectancy, leadership, and trainee performance.
J. Appl. Psychol. 67 (2), 194.
Eells, T.D., Robert Showalter, C., 1994. Work-related stress in American trial judges. J. Am. Acad. Psychiatry Law Online 22 (1), 71e83.
Elek, J.K., Agor, P.H., April 28, 2014. Can Explicit Instructions Reduce Expression of Implicit Bias? New
Questions Following a Test of a Specialized Jury Instruction. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/
abstract¼2430438.
Engel, D., Williams Woolley, A., Jing, L.X., Chabris, C.F., Malone, T.W., 2014. Reading the mind in the
eyes or reading between the lines? theory of mind predicts collective intelligence equally well online and
face-to-face. PLoS One 9 (12), e115212.
Eriksson, S., Rooth, D.-O., 2014. Do employers use unemployment as a sorting criterion when hiring? evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (3), 1014e1039.
Ewens, M., Tomlin, B., Wang, L.C., 2014. Statistical discrimination or prejudice? A large sample ﬁeld
experiment. Rev. Econ. Statistics 96 (1), 119e134.
Fein, S., Spencer, S.J., 1997. Prejudice as self-image maintenance: afﬁrming the self through derogating
others. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 73 (1), 31.
Fiske, S.T., Neuberg, S.L., 1990. A continuum of impression formation from category-based to individuating processes: inﬂuences of information and motivation on attention and interpretation. Adv. Exp.
Soc. Psychol. 23, 1e74.
Fisman, R., Iyengar, S.S., Kamenica, E., Simonson, I., 2008. Racial preferences in dating. Rev. Econ. Stud.
75 (177e32).
Fix, M., Struyk, R.J., 1993. Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in America.
Urban Institute Press.
Forbes, C.E., Schmader, T., 2010. Retraining attitudes and stereotypes to affect motivation and cognitive
capacity under stereotype threat. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 99 (5), 740.
Forehand, M.R., Deshpande, R., Reed II, A., 2002. Identity salience and the inﬂuence of differential activation of the social self-schema on advertising response. J. Appl. Psychol. 87 (6), 1086e1099.
Fryer, R.G., Levitt, S.D., 2004. The causes and consequences of distinctively black names. Q. J. Econ. 119
(3), 767e805.
Gaertner, S.L., Dovidio, J.F., Rust, M.C., Nier, J.A., Banker, B.S., Ward, C.M., Mottola, G.R.,
Houlette, M., 1999. Reducing intergroup bias: elements of intergroup cooperation. J. Personality
Soc. Psychol. 76 (3), 388.
Galarza, F.B., Yamada, G., 2014. Labor market discrimination in Lima, Peru: evidence from a ﬁeld
experiment. World Dev. 58, 83e94.
Galinsky, A.D., Moskowitz, G.B., 2000. Perspective-taking: decreasing stereotype expression, stereotype
accessibility, and in-group favoritism. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 78 (4), 208.
Galster, G., 1990. Racial discrimination in housing markets during the 1980s: a review of the audit evidence.
J. Plan. Educ. Res. 9 (3), 165e175.
Gawronski, B., Deutsch, R., Mbirkou, S., Seibt, B., Strack, F., 2008. When “just say No” is not enough:
afﬁrmation versus negation training and the reduction of automatic stereotype activation. J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 44 (2), 370e377.

387

388

Handbook of Field Experiments

Ghayad, R., 2013. The jobless trap. In: Job Market Paper, pp. 1e39.
Gilbert, D.T., Gregory Hixon, J., 1991. The trouble of thinking: activation and application of stereotypic
beliefs. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 60 (4), 509.
Glasford, D.E., Calcagno, J., 2012. The conﬂict of harmony: intergroup contact, commonality and political
solidarity between minority groups. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48 (1), 323e328.
Glover, D., Pallais, A., Pariente, W., 2015. Discrimination as a Self-Fulﬁlling Prophecy: Evidence from
French Grocery Store. Working Paper.
Goldberg, P., 1968. Are women prejudiced against women? Society 5 (5), 28e30.
Goldin, C., Rouse, C., 2000. Orchestrating impartiality: the impact of “blind” auditions on female
musicians. Am. Econ. Rev. 90, 715e741.
Golub, B., Jackson, M.O., 2012. How Homophily Affects the Speed of Learning and Best Response
Dynamics. FEEM Working Paper.
Good, C., Aronson, J., Inzlicht, M., 2003. Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: an intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 24 (6), 642e662.
Good, C., Aronson, J., Harder, J.A., 2008. Problems in the pipeline: stereotype threat and women’s achievement in high-level math courses. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 29 (1), 17e28.
Gosen, S., 2014. Social Desirability in Survey Research: Can the List Experiment Provide the Truth? (Ph.D.
Dissertation) Philipps-Universit€at, Marburg.
Green, A.R., Carney, D.R., Pallin, D.J., Ngo, L.H., Raymond, K.L., Iezzoni, L.I., Banaji, M.R., 2007. Implicit bias among physicians and its prediction of thrombolysis decisions for black and white patients. J.
Intern. Med. 22 (9), 1231e1238.
Green, S., Green, D.P., Dias, K., Paluck, B.L., 2016. The contact hypothesis re-examined. (in progress,
forthcoming).
Greenwald, A.G., Banaji, M.R., 1995. Implicit social cognition: attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychol. Rev. 102 (1), 4.
Greenwald, A.G., McGhee, D.E., Schwartz, J.L.K., 1998. Measuring individual differences in implicit
cognition: the implicit association test. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 74 (6), 1464.
Greenwald, A.G., Banaji, M., Nosek, B.A., 2003. Understanding and using the implicit association test: I. An
improved scoring algorithm. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 85 (2), 197e216.
Greenwald, A.G., Andrew Poehlman, T., Luis Uhlmann, E., Banaji, M., 2009. Understanding and using the
implicit association test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 97 (1),
17e41.
Guryan, J., Koﬁ Charles, K., 2013. Taste-based or statistical discrimination: the economics of discrimination
returns to its roots. Econ. J. 123 (572), F417eF432.
Hamermesh, D.S., Biddle, J.E., 1994. Beauty and the labour market. Am. Econ. Rev. 84, 1174e1194.
Hamilton, B.H., Nickerson, J.A., Owan, H., 2003. Team incentives and worker heterogeneity: an empirical
analysis of the impact of teams on productivity and participation. J. Political Econ. 111 (3), 465e497.
Hanson, A., Hawley, Z., 2011. Do landlords discriminate in the rental housing market? Evidence from an
internet ﬁeld experiment in us cities. J. Urban Econ. 70 (2e3), 99e114.
Hartley, L.R., Adams, R.G., 1974. Effect of noise on the stroop test. J. Exp. Psychol. 102 (1), 62.
Heckman, J., 1992. Randomization and social policy evaluation. In: Manski, C., Garﬁnkel, I. (Eds.), Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 201e230.
Heckman, J.J., 1998. Detecting discrimination. J. Econ. Perspect. 101e116.
Heckman, J.J., Siegelman, P., 1993. The urban Institute audit studies: their methods and ﬁndings. In:
Fix, M., Struyk, R. (Eds.), Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in
America. Urban Institute Press.
Heilman, M.E., Martell, R.F., 1986. Exposure to successful women: antidote to sex discrimination in applicant screening decisions? Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 37 (3), 376e390.
Hitsch, G.J., Hortaçsu, A., Ariely, D., 2010. Matching and sorting in online dating. Am. Econ. Rev.
130e163.
Hjort, J., 2013. Ethnic divisions and productions in ﬁrms. In: CESifo Working Paper Series.
Hoff, K., Pandey, P., 2006. Discrimination, social identity, and durable inequalities. Am. Econ. Rev.
206e211.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Holbrook, A.L., Krosnick, J.A., 2010. Social desirability in voter turnout reports: test using the item count
technique. Public Opin. Q. 74, 37e67.
Hoogendoorn, S., Van Praag, M., 2012. Ethnic diversity and team performance: a ﬁeld experiment. In: Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 2012-068/3.
Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H., Van Praag, M., 2013. The impact of gender diversity on the performance
of business teams: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Manag. Sci. 59 (7), 1514e1528.
Houlette, M.A., Gaertner, S.L., Johnson, K.M., Banker, B.S., Riek, B.M., Dovidio, J.F., 2004. Developing a
more inclusive social identity: an elementary school intervention. J. Soc. Issues 60 (1).
Hubbuck, J., Carter, S., 1980. Half a Chance?: a report on job discrimination against young blacks in
Nottingham. Comm. Racial Equal.
Hugenberg, K., Bodenhausen, G.V., 2004. Ambiguity in social categorization the role of prejudice and facial
affect in race categorization. Psychol. Sci. 15 (5), 342e345.
Iyer, L., Mani, A., Mishra, P., Topalova, P., 2012. The power of political voice: women’s political representation and crime in India. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 4 (4), 165e193.
Jacquemet, N., Yannelis, C., 2012. Indiscriminate discrimination: a correspondence test for ethnic homophily in the Chicago labor market. Labour Econ. 19 (6), 824e832.
James, F., DelCastillo, S.W., 1991. Measuring Job Discrimination by Private Employers Against Young
Black and Hispanic Seeking Entry Level Work in Denver Metropolitan Area. Unpublished report. University of Colorado, Denver.
Johnson, D.W., Johnson, R.T., 1989. Cooperation and Competition: Theory and Research. Interaction
Book Company, Edina, MN.
Johnson, J.D., Whitestone, E., Anderson Jackson, L., Gatto, L., 1995. Justice is still not colorblind: differential racial effects of exposure to inadmissible evidence. Personality Soc. Psychol. Bull. 21 (9), 893e898.
Jolson, M.A., 1974. Employment barriers in marketing. J. Mark.
Jones, B.F., Olken, B.A., 2005. Do leaders matter? National leadership and growth since world war II. Q. J.
Econ. 120 (3), 835e864.
Jowell, R., Prescott-Clarke, P., 1970. Racial discrimination and white-collar workers in Britain. Race Class
11 (4), 397e417.
Jussim, L., Harber, K.D., 2005. Teacher expectations and self-fulﬁlling prophecies: knowns and unknowns,
resolved and unresolved controversies. Personality Soc. Psychol. Rev. 9 (2), 131e155.
Kaas, L., Manger, C., 2012. Ethnic discrimination in Germany’s labour market: a ﬁeld experiment. Ger.
Econ. Rev. 13 (1), 1e20.
Kane, J.G., Craig, S.C., Wald, K.D., 2004. Religion and presidential politics in Florida: a list experiment.
Soc. Sci. Q. 85 (2).
Kang, J., et al., 2012. Implicit bias in the courtroom. UCLA Law Rev. 59 (5).
Karlan, D.S., Zinman, J., May 2012. List randomization for sensitive behavior: an application for measuring
use of loan proceeds. J. Dev. Econ. 98 (1), 71e75.
Katz, P.A., 2000. Intergroup Relations Among Youth: Summary of a Research Workshop. Research
Summary. Carnegie Corp, New York.
Katz, P.A., Zalk, S.R., 1978. Modiﬁcation of children’s racial attitudes. Dev. Psychol. 14 (5), 447.
Kawakami, K., Dovidio, J.F., Moll, J., Hermsen, S., Russin, A., 2000. Just say No (to stereotyping): effects of
training in the negation of stereotypic associations on stereotype activation. J. Personality Soc. Psychol.
78 (5), 871.
Kawakami, K., Dovidio, J.F., Van Kamp, S., 2007a. The impact of counterstereotypic training and related
correction processes on the application of stereotypes. Group Process. Intergr. Relat. 10 (2), 139e156.
Kawakami, K., Phills, C.E., Steele, J.R., Dovidio, J.F., 2007b. (Close) distance makes the heart grow fonder:
improving implicit racial attitudes and interracial interactions through approach behaviors. J. Personality
Soc. Psychol. 92 (6), 957.
Kawakami, K., Steele, J.R., Cifa, C., Phills, C.E., Dovidio, J.F., 2008. Approaching math increases
math¼me and math¼pleasant. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 44 (3), 818e825.
Keinan, G., 1987. Decision making under stress: scanning of alternatives under controllable and uncontrollable threats. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 52 (3), 639.
Key, V., 1949. Southern Politics in State and Nation. University of Tennessee Press.

389

390

Handbook of Field Experiments

Kondylis, F., Mobarak, M., Ben Yishay, A., Jones, M., 2015. Are Gender Differences in Performance Innate
or Social Mediated? Working Paper.
Krause, A., Rinne, U., Zimmermann, K.F., 2012a. Anonymous job applications in Europe. IZA J. Eur.
Labor Stud. 1 (1), 1e20.
Krause, A., Rinne, U., Zimmermann, K.F., 2012b. Anonymous job applications of fresh Ph.D. Economists.
Econ. Lett. 117 (2).
Kroft, K., Lange, F., Notowidigdo, M.J., 2013. Duration dependence and labor market conditions: evidence
from a ﬁeld experiment. Q. J. Econ. 128 (3), 1123e1167.
Kuklinski, J.H., Cobb, M.D., Gilens, M., 1997a. Racial attitudes and the “new South”. J. Polit. 59 (2),
323e349.
Kuklinski, J.H., Sniderman, P.M., Knight, K., Piazza, T., Tetlock, P.E., Lawrence, G.R., Mellers, B., 1997b.
Racial prejudice and attitudes toward afﬁrmative action. Am. J. Political Sci. 41 (2), 402e419.
Lahey, J.N., 2008. Age, women, and hiring: an experimental study. J. Hum. Resour. 43 (1), 30e56.
Lai, C.K., Marini, M., Lehr, S.A., Cerruti, C., Jiyun-Elizabeth, L.S., Joy-Gaba, J.A., Ho, A.K.,
Teachman, B.A., Wojcik, S.P., Koleva, S.P., et al., 2014. Reducing implicit racial preferences: I. A
comparative investigation of 17 interventions. J. Exp. Psychol. General.
Lane, K.A., Banaji, M.R., Nosek, B.A., Greenwald, A.G., 2007. Implicit measures of attitudes. In:
Wittenbrink, B., Schwarz, N. (Eds.), Understanding and Using the Implicit Association Test: IV. Guilford, New York, pp. 59e102.
Lang, K., 1986. A language theory of discrimination. Q. J. Econ. 101, 363e382.
Lavy, V., Sand, E., 2015. On the Origins of Gender Human Capital Gaps: Short and Long Term Consequences of Teachers’ Stereotypical Biases. NBER Working Paper No. 20909.
Lazear, E., 1999. Language and culture. J. Political Econ. 107 (6), S95eS126.
LeBoeuf, R.A., Shaﬁr, E., Bayuk, J.B., 2010. The conﬂicting choices of alternating selves. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Decis. Process. 111 (1), 48e61.
Lebrecht, S., Pierce, L.J., Tarr, M.J., Tanaka, J.W., 2009. Perceptual other-race training reduces implicit
racial bias. PLoS One 4 (1), e4215.
Leippe, M.R., Eisenstadt, D., 1994. Generalization of dissonance reduction: decreasing prejudice through
induced compliance. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 67 (3), 395.
Levy, S.R., Stroessner, S.J., Dweck, C.S., 1998. Stereotype formation and endorsement: the role of implicit
theories. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 74 (6), 1421e1436.
List, J.A., 2004. The nature and extent of discrimination in the marketplace: evidence from the ﬁeld. Q. J.
Econ. 119 (1), 49e89.
List, J.A., 2009. Informed consent in social science. Science 322 (5902), 672.
Lockwood, P., Kunda, Z., 1997. Superstars and me: predicting the impact of role models on the self. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 73 (1), 91.
Lustig, I., 2003. The Inﬂuence of Studying Foreign Conﬂicts on Students’ Perceptions of the Israeli-Palestinian Conﬂict (Unpublished Masters thesis). University of Haifa.
Ma, D.S., Correll, J., Wittenbrink, B., Bar-Anan, Y., Srirarm, N., Nosek, B.A., 2013. When fatigue turns
deadly: the association between fatigue and racial bias in the decision to shoot. Basic Appl. Soc. Psychol.
35, 515e524.
Madva, A., 2015. Biased Against Debiasing: On the Role of (Institutionally Sponsored) Self-Transformation
in the Struggle Against Prejudice. Working Paper, California State Polytechnic University.
Martinez, M.D., Craig, S.C., 2010. Race and 2008 president politics in Florida: a list experiment. Forum 8 (2).
Marx, B., Pons, V., Suri, T., 2015. Homogeneous Teams and Productivity. Unpublish manuscript, available
at: http://www.novasbe.unl.pt/images/novasbe/ﬁles/INOVA_Seminars/Vincent_Pons.pdf.
Matsa, D.A., Miller, A.R., 2013. A female style in corporate Leadership? Evidence from quotas. Am. Econ. J.
Appl. Econ. 5 (3), 136e169.
Maurer-Fazio, M., 2012. Ethnic discrimination in China’s internet job board labor market. IZA J. Migr. 1
(12), 1e24.
McConnell, A.R., Leibold, J.M., 2001. Relations among the implicit association test, discriminatory
behavior, and explicit measures of racial attitudes. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 37 (435e442).
McGinnity, F., Nelson, J., Lunn, P., Quinn, E., 2009. Discrimination in recruitment. Equal. Res. Ser.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

McIntyre, S., Moberg, D.J., Posner, B.Z., 1980. Preferential treatment in preselection decisions according to
race and sex. Acad. Manag. J. 23 (4), 738e749.
Milkman, K.L., Akinola, M., Chugh, D., 2012. Temporal distance and discrimination: an audit study in
academia. Psychol. Sci. 23 (7), 710e717.
Miller, C., 2014. The Persistent Effect of Temporary Afﬁrmative Action. Job Market Paper.
Mobius, M.M., Rosenblat, T.S., 2006. Why beauty matters. Am. Econ. Rev. 222e235.
Moore, D.A., Swift, S.A., Sharek, Z.S., Gino, F., 2010. Correspondence bias in performance evaluation:
why grade inﬂation works. Personality Soc. Psychol. Bull. 36 (6), 843e852.
Neumark, D., 2012. Detecting discrimination in audit and correspondence studies. J. Hum. Resour. 47 (4),
1128e1157.
Neumark, D., Bank, R.J., Van Nort, K.D., 1996. Sex discrimination in restaurant hiring: an audit study. Q. J.
Econ. 111 (3), 915e941.
Newman, J.M., 1978. Discrimination in recruitment: an empirical analysis. Industrial Labor Relat. Rev. 32
(1), 15e23.
Nosek, B.A., Banaji, M., Greenwald, A.G., 2002. Harvesting implicit group attitudes and beliefs from a
demonstration website. Group Dyn. Theory, Res. Pract. 6 (1), 101e115.
Nunley, J.M., Pugh, A., Romero, N., Alan Seals, R., 2014. An Examination of Racial Discrimination in the
Labor Market for Recent College Graduates: Estimates from the Field. Working Paper.
Ong, D., Wang, J., 2015. Income attraction: an online dating ﬁeld experiment. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 111
(C), 13e22.
Oreopoulos, P., 2011. Why do skilled immigrants struggle in the labor market? A ﬁeld experiment with thirteen thousand resumes. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 3 (4), 148e171.
Oswald, F., Mitchell, G., Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., Tetlock, P.E., 2013. Predicting ethnic and
racial discrimination: a meta-analysis of IAT criterion studies. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 105 (2),
171e192.
Oz, S., Eden, D., 1994. Restraining the Golem: boosting performance by changing the interpretation of low
scores. J. Appl. Psychol. 85, 314e322.
Padro i Miguel, G., 2007. The control of politicians in divided societies: the politics of fear. Rev. Econ. Stud.
74 (4), 1259e1274.
Pager, D., 2003. The mark of a criminal record. Am. J. Sociol. 108 (5), 937e975.
Paluck, E.L., Green, D.P., 2009. Prejudice reduction: what works? A review and assessment of research and
practice. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60 (339e367).
Pande, R., 2003. Can mandated political representation increase policy inﬂuence for disadvantaged minorities? Theory and evidence from India. Am. Econ. Rev. 93 (4), 1132e1151.
Patacchini, E., Ragusa, G., Zenou, Y., 2012. Unexplored Dimensions of Discrimination in Europe: Religion, Homosexuality and Physical Appearance. Unpublished manuscript: http://www.frdb.org/
upload/ﬁle/FRDB_Rapporto_PATACCHINI.pdf.
Payne, B.K., 2006. Weapon bias: split-second decisions and unintended stereotyping. Curr. Dir. Psychol.
Sci. 15, 287e291.
Payne, B.K., Shimizu, Y., Jacoby, L.L., 2005. Mental control and visual illusions: toward explaining racebiased weapon misidentiﬁcations. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 41 (1), 36e47.
Petit, P., 2007. The effects of age and family constraints on gender hiring discrimination: a ﬁeld experiment
in the French ﬁnancial sector. Labour Econ. 14 (3), 371e391.
Pettigrew, T.F., Tropp, L.R., 2000. Does intergroup contact reduce prejudice? Recent meta-analytic
ﬁndings. Reducing Prejudice Discrimination 93 (114).
Pfann, G.A., Biddle, J.E., Hamermesh, D.S., Bosman, C.M., 2000. Business success and businesses’ beauty
capital. Econ. Lett. 67 (2), 201e207.
Phelps, E.S., 1972. The statistical theory of racism and sexism. Am. Econ. Rev. 659e661.
Plant, E.A., Devine, P.G., 2009. The active control of prejudice: unpacking the intentions guiding control
effects. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 96, 640e652.
Pope, D.G., Sydnor, J.R., 2011. What’s in a picture? Evidence of discrimination from Prosper.com. J. Hum.
Resour. 46 (1), 53e92.
Prendergast, C., Topel, R., 1996. Favoritism in organizations. J. Political Econ. 104, 446e461.

391

392

Handbook of Field Experiments

Rao, G., 2013. Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Diversity, Discrimination and Generosity in Delhi
Schools. Job Market Paper.
Rehavi, M.M., 2007. Sex and Politics: Do Female Legislators Affect State Spending? Unpublished
manuscript University of Michigan.
Reicher, S., Levine, M., 1994. Deindividuation, power relations between groups and the expression of social
identity: the effects of visibility to the out-group. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 33 (2), 145e163.
Reynolds, D., 2007. Restraining golem and harnessing pygmalion in the classroom: a laboratory study of
managerial expectations and task design. Acad. Manag. Learn. Educ. 6 (4), 475e483.
Riach, P.A., Rich, J., 1991. Testing for racial discrimination in the labour market. Camb. J. Econ.
239e256.
Riach, P.A., Rich, J., 2002. Field experiments of discrimination in the market place. Econ. J. 112 (483),
F480eF518.
Riach, P.A., Rich, J., 2010. An experimental investigation of age discrimination in the english labor market.
 conomie de Statistique 169e185.
Ann. Econ. Statistics/Annales d’E
Rokeach, M., 1971. Long-range experimental modiﬁcation of values, attitudes, and behavior. Am. Psychol.
26 (5), 453.
Rokeach, M., 1973. The Nature of Human Values, vol. 438. Free Press, New York.
Rooth, D.-O., 2009. Obesity, attractiveness, and differential treatment in hiring: a ﬁeld experiment. J. Hum.
Resour. 44 (3), 710e735.
Rooth, D.-O., 2010. Automatic associations and discrimination in hiring: real world evidence. Labour Econ.
17 (3), 523e534.
Rosenthal, R., 1963. On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: the Experimenter’s hypothesis as unintended determinant of experimental results. Am. Sci. 268e283.
Rosenthal, R., 1994. Interpersonal expectancy effects: a 30-year perspective. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci.
176e179.
Rosenthal, R., Jacobson, L., 1968. Pygmalion in the classroom. Urban Rev. 3 (1), 16e20.
Rosenthal, R., Rubin, D.B., 1978. Interpersonal expectancy effects: the ﬁrst 345 studies. Behav. Brain Sci. 1
(3), 377e386.
Rudman, L.A., Glick, P., 2001. Prescriptive gender stereotypes and backlash toward agentic women. J. Soc.
Issues 57 (4), 743e762.
Rudman, L.A., Lee, M.R., 2002. Implicit and explicit consequences of exposure to violent and misogynous
rap music. Group Process. Intergr. Relat. 5 (2), 133e150.
Sacerdote, B., 2000. Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates. NBER
Working Paper No. 7469.
Saguy, T., Tausch, N., Dovidio, J.F., Pratto, F., 2009. The irony of harmony intergroup contact can produce
false expectations for equality. Psychol. Sci. 20 (1), 114e121.
Sherman, J.W., Lee, A.Y., Bessenoff, G.R., Frost, L.A., 1998. Stereotype efﬁciency reconsidered: encoding
ﬂexibility under cognitive load. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 75 (3), 589.
Shih, M., Wang, E., Trahan Bucher, A., Stotzer, R., 2009. Perspective taking: reducing prejudice towards
general outgroups and speciﬁc individuals. Group Process. Intergr. Relat. 12 (5), 565e577.
Shook, N.J., Fazio, R.H., 2008. Roommate relationships: a comparison of interracial and same-race living
situations. Group Process. Intergr. Relat. 11 (4), 425e437.
Slavin, R.E., 1977. How student learning teams can integrate the desegregated classroom. Integr. Educ. 15
(6), 56e58.
Slavin, R.E., 1979. Effects of biracial leaning teams on cross-racial friendships. J. Educ. Psychol. 71
(381e387).
Slavin, R.E., 1995. Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research, and Practice, second ed. Allyn & Bacon.
Slavin, R.E., Cooper, R., 1999. Improving intergroup relations: lessons learned from cooperative learning
programs. J. Soc. Issues 55 (4), 647e663.
Slavin, R.E., Oickle, E., 1981. Effects of cooperative learning teams on student achievement and race relations: treatment by race interactions. Sociol. Educ. 54 (3), 174e180.
Snow, R.E., 1995. Pygmalion and intelligence? Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 169e171.
Stanovich, K.E., West, R.F., 2000. Advancing the rationality debate. Behav. Brain Sci. 23 (5), 701e717.

Field Experiments on Discrimination

Steele, C.M., Aronson, J., 1995. Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 69 (5), 797e811.
Stephan, W.G., Finlay, K., 1999. The role of empathy in improving intergroup relations. J. Soc. Issues 55 (4),
729e743.
Streb, M.J., Burrell, B., Frederick, B., Genovese, M.A., 2008. Social desirability effects and support for a female American president. Public Opin. Q. 72 (1), 76e89.
Tajfel, H., 1970. Experiments in intergroup discrimination. Sci. Am. 223 (5), 96e102.
Tajfel, H., Turner, J.C., 1979. An integrative theory of intergroup conﬂict. Soc. Psychol. Intergr. Relat. 33
(47), 74.
Todd, A.R., Bodenhausen, G.V., Richeson, J.A., Galinsky, A.D., 2011. Perspective taking combats automatic expressions of racial bias. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 100 (6), 1027.
Tsuchiya, T., Hirai, Y., Ono, S., 2007. A study of properties of the item count technique. Public Opin. Q.
71 (253e272).
Turner, M.A., Fix, M., Struyk, R.J., 1991. Opportunities Denied, Opportunities Diminished: Racial
Discrimination in Hiring. The Urban Institute.
Uhlmann, E.L., Cohen, G.L., 2005. Constructed criteria redeﬁning merit to justify discrimination. Psychol.
Sci. 16 (6), 474e480.
Van Knippenberg, A.D., Dijksterhuis, A.P., Vermeulen, D., 1999. Judgement and memory of a criminal act:
the effects of stereotypes and cognitive load. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 29 (2e3), 191e201.
Wittenbrink, B., Judd, C.M., Park, B., 1997. Evidence for racial prejudice at the implicit level and its relationship with questionnaire measurements. J. Personality Soc. Psychol. 72, 262e274.
Woolley, A.W., Chabris, C.F., Pentland, A., Hashmi, N., Malone, T.W., 2010. Evidence for a collective
intelligence factor in the performance of human groups. Science 330 (6004), 686e688.
Wright, B.R.E., Wallace, M., Bailey, J., Hyde, A., 2013. Religious afﬁliation and hiring discrimination in
New England: a ﬁeld experiment. Res. Soc. Stratif. Mobil. 34, 111e126.
Yeager, D.S., Paunesku, D., Walton, G.M., Dweck, C.S., 2013. How can we instill productive mindsets at
scale? A review of the evidence and an initial R&D agenda. In: White Paper for White House Meeting
on “Excellence in Education: The Importance of Academic Mindsets”.
Yeager, D.S., Vaughns, V.P., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P., Master, A., Hessert, W.T., Williams, M.E.,
Cohen, G.L., 2014. Breaking the cycle of mistrust: wise interventions to provide critical feedback across
the racial divide. J. Exp. Psychol. General 143, 804e824.
Yinger, J., 1986. Measuring racial discrimination with fair housing audits: caught in the act. Am. Econ. Rev.
881e893.
Yinger, J., 1998. Evidence on discrimination in consumer markets. J. Econ. Perspect. 23e40.
Zinovyeva, N., Bagues, M., 2011. Does Gender Matter for Academic Promotion? Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment. IZA Discussion Paper 5537.
Zussman, A., 2013. Ethnic discrimination: lessons from the Israeli online market for used cars. Econ. J. 123
(572), F433eF468.

393

