Port Econ J (2002) 1: 141–162

c Springer-Verlag 2002


Dynamic panel data models:
a guide to micro data methods and practice
Stephen R. Bond
Nufﬁeld College, Oxford, UK, and Institute for Fiscal Studies, 7 Ridgmount Street,
London, WC1E 7AE, UK (e-mail: steve.bond@nufﬁeld.ox.ac.uk)

Abstract. This paper reviews econometric methods for dynamic panel data models,
and presents examples that illustrate the use of these procedures. The focus is on
panels where a large number of individuals or ﬁrms are observed for a small number
of time periods, typical of applications with microeconomic data. The emphasis is
on single equation models with autoregressive dynamics and explanatory variables
that are not strictly exogenous, and hence on the Generalised Method of Moments
estimators that are widely used in this context. Two examples using ﬁrm-level
panels are discussed in detail: a simple autoregressive model for investment rates;
and a basic production function.
Key words: Panel data – Dynamic models – Generalised method of moments
JEL Classiﬁcation: C23

1 Introduction
Panel data is now widely used to estimate dynamic econometric models. Its advantage over cross-section data in this context is obvious: we cannot estimate dynamic
models from observations at a single point in time, and it is rare for single crosssection surveys to provide sufﬁcient information about earlier time periods for
dynamic relationships to be investigated. Its advantages over aggregate time series data include the possibility that underlying microeconomic dynamics may be
 This paper is prepared for a special issue of the Portuguese Economic Journal. My understanding
of this subject has beneﬁtted immeasurably from the input of colleagues, notably Manuel Arellano,
Richard Blundell, Costas Meghir, Steve Nickell and Frank Windmeijer. I thank Joao Santos Silva,
Frank Windmeijer and other participants at the Cemmap/ESRC Econometric Study Group workshop
in London on 22 February 2002 for detailed comments on an earlier draft. Financial support from the
ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy is gratefully acknowledged.

142

S. R. Bond

obscured by aggregation biases,1 and the scope that panel data offers to investigate heterogeneity in adjustment dynamics between different types of individuals,
household or ﬁrms. Whilst these advantages are shared by repeated cross-section
or cohort data, from which pseudo-panel data on grouped observations can be constructed,2 genuine panel data - with repeated observations on the same individuals will typically allow more of the variation in the micro data to be used in constructing
parameter estimates, as well as permitting the use of relatively simple econometric
techniques.
Dynamic models are of interest in a wide range of economic applications, including Euler equations for household consumption, adjustment cost models for
ﬁrms’ factor demands, and empirical models of economic growth. Even when coefﬁcients on lagged dependent variables are not of direct interest, allowing for dynamics in the underlying process may be crucial for recovering consistent estimates
of other parameters. An example occurs in the estimation of production functions
when productivity shocks are serially correlated and relative factor inputs respond
to these shocks; this is discussed further in Section 3 below.
The focus in this paper will be on the estimation of single equation, autoregressive-distributed lag models from panels with a large number of cross-section
units, each observed for a small number of time periods. This situation is typical
of micro panel data on individuals or ﬁrms, and calls for estimation methods that
do not require the time dimension to become large in order to obtain consistent
parameter estimates. Assumptions about the properties of initial conditions also
play an important role in this setting, since the inﬂuence of the initial observations
on each subsequent observation cannot safely be ignored when the time dimension
is short. We also focus on methods that can be used in the absence of any strictly
exogenous explanatory variables or instruments, and that extend easily to models
with predetermined or endogenous explanatory variables. Strict exogeneity rules
out any feedback from current or past shocks to current values of the variable, which
is often not a natural restriction in the context of economic models relating several
jointly determined outcomes, such as consumption and income or investment and
Tobin’s q. Identiﬁcation then depends on limited serial correlation in the error term
of the equation, which leads to a convenient and widely used class of Generalised
Method of Moments (GMM) estimators for this type of dynamic panel data model.
Rigorous surveys of these estimators can be found in, for example, Arellano and
Honore (2001) or Blundell, Bond and Windmeijer (2000). The emphasis here will
be on an intuitive review of these methods, intended to give the applied researcher
an appreciation for when it may be reasonable to use particular GMM estimators,
and how this can be evaluated in practice. This will be illustrated in the context
of two empirical examples. The ﬁrst uses panel data on UK ﬁrms to estimate a
simple autoregressive model for company investment rates. The second uses panel
data on US ﬁrms to estimate a basic production function speciﬁcation. An obvious
difference between these two examples is that the former illustrates the use of
these methods to estimate a univariate dynamic model, whilst the latter considers
1
2

See, for example, Nickell (1986).
See, for example,Verbeek (1996).

Dynamic panel data models

143

a model with additional explanatory variables. A more subtle difference is that the
output and input series used in the production function context are near unit root
series, whilst the investment rates - which are basically growth rates in the capital
stock - are not. Whilst the time series properties of the series are not crucial for the
asymptotic distribution theory in this setting, where the number of cross-section
units is assumed to become large with the number of time periods treated as ﬁxed,
they can nevertheless be crucial for the identiﬁcation of parameters of interest
and for the ﬁnite sample properties of particular GMM estimators. Speciﬁcally,
estimators which rely on ﬁrst-differencing or related transformations to eliminate
unobserved individual-speciﬁc effects, and then use lagged values of endogenous
or predetermined variables as instruments for subsequent ﬁrst-differences, can be
expected to perform poorly in situations where the series are close to being random
walks, so that their ﬁrst-differences are close to being innovations, and will not
identify parameters of interest in some limiting cases.
Section 2 discusses the estimation of simple autoregressive models and illustrates the use of these ﬁrst-differenced GMM methods in a setting where this identiﬁcation problem does not arise. Section 3 discusses the use of additional moment
conditions that typically require stronger assumptions on the initial conditions,
but which can be highly informative in cases where identiﬁcation using the ﬁrstdifferenced equations alone becomes weak. This is illustrated in a multivariate
context. Section 4 concludes.

2 Autoregressive models
In this section we focus on estimation methods for the simple AR(1) model
yit = αyi,t−1 + (ηi + vit ); |α| < 1; i = 1, 2, . . . , N ; t = 2, 3, . . . , T

(2.1)

where yit is an observation on some series for individual i in period t, yi,t−1 is the
observation on the same series for the same individual in the previous period, ηi is an
unobserved individual-speciﬁc time-invariant effect which allows for heterogeneity
in the means of the yit series across individuals, and vit is a disturbance term. A
key assumption we maintain throughout is that the disturbances vit are independent
across individuals. The number of individuals for which data is available (N ) is
assumed to be large whilst the number of time periods for which data is available
(T ) is assumed to be small, and asymptotic properties are considered as N becomes
large with T ﬁxed.3
We treat the individual effects (ηi ) as being stochastic, which here implies that
they are necessarily correlated with the lagged dependent variable yi,t−1 unless
the distribution of the ηi is degenerate. Initially we further assume that the disturbances (vit ) are serially uncorrelated. These jointly imply that the Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) estimator of α in the levels equations (2.1) is inconsistent, since the
3 In this context it is straightforward to allow for time-speciﬁc effects, common to all individuals,
simply by including period-speciﬁc intercepts in the speciﬁcation, or by transforming the series into
deviations from period-speciﬁc means (i.e. the mean across all individuals for a particular time period).
We simplify our discussion by not dealing explicitly with this case.

144

S. R. Bond

explanatory variable yi,t−1 is positively correlated with the error term (ηi + vit )
due to the presence of the individual effects, and this correlation does not vanish as
the number of individuals in the sample gets larger.4 Standard results for omitted
variable bias indicate that, at least in large samples, the OLS levels estimator is
biased upwards.
The Within Groups estimator eliminates this source of inconsistency by transforming the equation to eliminate ηi . Speciﬁcally the mean values of yit , yi,t−1 ,
ηi and vit across the T − 1 observations for each individual i are obtained, and
the original observations are expressed as deviations from these individual means.
OLS is then used to estimate these transformed equations. Since the mean of the
time-invariant ηi is itself ηi , these individual effects are removed from the transformed equations. However, for panels where the number of time periods available
is small, this transformation induces a non-negligible correlation between the transformed lagged dependent variable and the transformed error term. The transformed
1
lagged dependent variable is yi,t−1 − T −1
(yi1 + . . . + yit + . . . + yi,T −1 ) whilst
1
the transformed error term is vit − T −1 (vi2 + . . . + vi,t−1 + . . . + viT ). The comit
ponent −y
T −1 in the former is correlated with vit in the latter, and the component
−vi,t−1
in the latter is correlated with yi,t−1 in the former. These leading corT −1
relations, which are both negative, dominate positive correlations between other
−v
−yi,t−1
components such as Ti,t−1
−1 and T −1 , so that the correlation between the transformed lagged dependent variable and the transformed error term can be shown to
be negative.5 This correlation does not vanish as the number of individuals in the
sample increases, so that the Within Groups estimator is also inconsistent here.6
Standard results for omitted variables bias indicate that, at least in large samples,
the Within Groups estimator is biased downwards.7
The fact that these two estimators are likely to be biased in opposite directions
is useful. Thus we might hope that a candidate consistent estimator will lie between
the OLS and Within Groups estimates, or at least not be signiﬁcantly higher than the
former or signiﬁcantly lower than the latter. In cases where the AR(1) model seems
well speciﬁed and this pattern is not observed, we might suspect either inconsistency
or severe ﬁnite sample bias for the supposedly consistent estimator, and go on to
consider more rigorous testing to investigate if this is indeed the case.8
4 Nor does this correlation vanish as the number of time periods increases, so that OLS levels remains
inconsistent for panels with large T .
5 See Nickell (1981).
6 However the contribution of each time period to the individual means becomes negligibly small
as the number of time periods gets larger. Consequently this correlation induced by the transformation
vanishes, and the Within Groups estimator is consistent in the case of large T panels.
7 The lagged dependent variable in the AR(1) model (2.1) is an example of an explanatory variable
that is predetermined with respect to the disturbances (vit ), but not strictly exogenous in the sense of
being uncorrelated with all past, present and future values of these disturbances. The Within Groups
estimator, which introduces all realisations of the vit series into the transformed error term, is only
consistent in large N , ﬁxed T panels if all the right-hand side variables are strictly exogenous.
8 In cases where the AR(1) model does not seem well speciﬁed, a similar indication may be available
by considering the sum of the estimated coefﬁcients on the lagged values of the dependent variable in
higher-order autoregressive models. For example, in the AR(2) model yit = α1 yi,t−1 + α2 yi,t−2 +
(ηi + vit ), we can compare OLS levels and Within Groups estimates of (α1 + α2 ).

Dynamic panel data models

145

Maximum Likelihood estimators for the AR(1) panel data model have been
developed, but an awkward feature of dynamic models in short T panels is that the
distribution of yit for t = 2, 3, . . . , T depends in a non-negligible way on what is
assumed about the distribution of the initial conditions yi1 . In specifying the model
(2.1) we have not restricted the process that generates these initial conditions, and
a wide variety of alternative processes could be considered. For example the yi1
may be stochastic or non-stochastic, correlated or uncorrelated with the individual
effects ηi , speciﬁed such that the mean of the yit series for individual i takes a
ηi
) for each observation t = 1, 2, . . . , T , or to satisfy higher
stationary value ( 1−α
order stationarity properties. Different assumptions about the nature of the initial
conditions will lead to different likelihood functions, and the resulting Maximum
Likelihood estimators of α can be inconsistent when this initial conditions process is
mis-speciﬁed. Interested readers are referred to Hsiao (1986) for further discussion.9
Instrumental Variables estimators which require much weaker assumptions
about the initial conditions have therefore been attractive in this context. The basic
ﬁrst-differenced Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) estimator for the AR(1) panel
data model was proposed by Anderson and Hsiao (1981, 1982), initially as a way of
obtaining a consistent starting value for computation of Maximum Likelihood estimators. The ﬁrst-differencing transformation also eliminates the individual effects
ηi from the model
∆yit = α∆yi,t−1 + ∆vit ; |α| < 1; i = 1, 2, . . . , N ; t = 3, 4, . . . , T

(2.2)

where ∆yit = yit − yi,t−1 . An important difference from the Within transformation, however, is that ﬁrst-differencing does not introduce all realisations of the
disturbances (vi2 , vi3 , . . . , viT ) into the error term of the transformed equation for
period t. The dependence of ∆vit on vi,t−1 implies that OLS estimates of α in
the ﬁrst-differenced model are inconsistent, with the direction of the inconsistency
being downward and typically greater than that found for the Within Groups estimator.10 However consistent estimates of α can now be obtained using 2SLS with
instrumental variables that are both correlated with ∆yi,t−1 and orthogonal to ∆vit .
The only assumption required on the initial conditions yi1 is that they are uncorrelated with the subsequent disturbances vit for t = 2, 3, . . . , T , in which case
the initial conditions are said to be predetermined. The correlation between yi1 and
the individual effects ηi is left unrestricted, and there is no requirement for any stationarity condition to be satisﬁed. Together with the previous assumption that the
disturbances vit are serially uncorrelated, predetermined initial conditions imply
that the lagged level yi,t−2 will be uncorrelated with ∆vit and thus available as an
9 Blundell and Smith (1991) develop a class of maximum likelihood estimators which avoid this
fragility by conditioning on the initial observations in the sample. Binder, Hsiao and Pesaran (2000)
present maximum likelihood estimators which allow the possibility of α = 1 and hence can be considered for unit root testing, although speciﬁc assumptions about the initial conditions are still required
in the α < 1 case. Both these approaches can be extended to vector autoregressive models, although
not, so far as I am aware, to models where the process for additional explanatory (x) variables is not
speciﬁed.
10 The transformations, and hence the corresponding OLS estimators, coincide in the special case
when T = 3.

146

S. R. Bond

instrumental variable for the ﬁrst-differenced equations in (2.2). The resulting 2SLS
estimator is consistent in large N , ﬁxed T panels, and identiﬁes the autoregressive
parameter α provided at least 3 time series observations are available (T  3).11
Additional instruments are available when the panel has more than 3 time series observations. Whilst yi1 is the only instrument that can be used in the ﬁrstdifferenced equation for period t = 3, both yi1 and yi2 can be used in the ﬁrstdifferenced equation for period t = 4, and the vector (yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yi,T −2 ) can be
used in the ﬁrst-differenced equation for period t = T . Since the model is overidentiﬁed with T > 3, and the ﬁrst-differenced error term ∆vit has a ﬁrst-order
moving average form of serial correlation if the maintained assumption that the vit
are serially uncorrelated is correct, 2SLS is not asymptotically efﬁcient even if the
complete set of available instruments is used for each equation and the disturbances
vit are homoskedastic. The Generalised Method of Moments (GMM), developed
by Hansen (1982), provides a convenient framework for obtaining asymptotically
efﬁcient estimators in this context, and ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimators for the
AR(1) panel data model were developed by Holtz-Eakin, Newey and Rosen (1988)
and Arellano and Bond (1991). Essentially these use an instrument matrix of the
form


yi1 0 0 . . . 0 . . . 0
 0 yi1 yi2 . . . 0 . . . 0 

(2.3)
Zi = 
 . . . ... . ... . ,
0 0 0 . . . yi1 . . . yi,T −2
where rows correspond to the ﬁrst-differenced equations for periods t = 3, 4, . . . ,T
for individual i, and exploit the moment conditions
E [Zi ∆vi ] = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , N

(2.4)

where ∆vi = (∆vi3, ∆vi4 , . . . ., ∆viT ) .
In general, the asymptotically efﬁcient GMM estimator based on this set of
moment conditions minimises the criterion


N
N
1  
1 

(2.5)
JN =
∆vi Zi WN
Z ∆vi
N i=1
N i=1 i
using the weight matrix
WN

N

1 
Zi ∆v i ∆v i Zi
=
N i=1

−1
,

where the ∆v i are consistent estimates of the ﬁrst-differenced residuals obtained
from a preliminary consistent estimator. Hence this is known as a two-step GMM
estimator. Under homoskedasticity of the vit disturbances, the particular structure
11 This 2SLS estimator is also consistent in large T panels, although as we have seen the Within
Groups estimator is also consistent in this context.

Dynamic panel data models

147

of the ﬁrst-differenced model implies that an asymptotically equivalent GMM estimator can be obtained in one-step, using instead the weight matrix
W1N

−1
N
1  
=
(Z HZi )
,
N i=1 i

where H is a (T − 2) square matrix with 2’s on the main diagonal, -1’s on the
ﬁrst off-diagonals and zeros elsewhere. Notice that W1N does not depend on any
estimated parameters.
At a minimum this suggests that the one-step estimator using W1N is a reasonable choice for the initial consistent estimator used to compute the optimal weight
matrix WN and hence to compute the two-step estimator. In fact a lot of applied
work using these GMM estimators has focused on results for the one-step estimator
rather than the two-step estimator. This is partly because simulation studies have
suggested very modest efﬁciency gains from using the two-step version, even in
the presence of considerable heteroskedasticity,12 but more importantly because
the dependence of the two-step weight matrix on estimated parameters makes the
usual asymptotic distribution approximations less reliable for the two-step estimator. Simulation studies have shown that the asymptotic standard errors tend to be
much too small, or the asymptotic t-ratios much too big, for the two-step estimator,
in sample sizes where the equivalent tests based on the one-step estimator are quite
accurate.13 Windmeijer (2000) provides a formal analysis of this issue, and proposes a ﬁnite-sample correction for the asymptotic variance of the two-step GMM
estimator which is potentially very useful in this class of models.
When T > 3 and the model is overidentiﬁed, the validity of the assumptions
used to obtain (2.4) can be tested using the standard GMM test of overidentifying
restrictions, or Sargan test. In particular N JN in (2.5) has an asymptotic χ2 distribution under the null that these moment conditions are valid (see Sargan, 1958, 1988;
Hansen, 1982). In this context the key identifying assumption that there is no serial
correlation in the vit disturbances can also be tested by testing for no second-order
serial correlation in the ﬁrst-differenced residuals; see Arellano and Bond (1991).14
Bond and Windmeijer (2002) review alternative approaches to testing hypotheses
about the parameter of interest α.
These methods extend straightforwardly to higher order autoregressive models
and to models with limited moving-average serial correlation in the disturbances vit ,
provided that a minimum number of time series observations are available to identify
the parameters of interest. For example, if vit is (2.1) is itself M A(1), then the ﬁrstdifferenced error term ∆vit in (2.2) is M A(2). As a result yi,t−2 would not be a
valid instrumental variable in these ﬁrst-differenced equations, but yi,t−3 and longer
lags remain available as instruments. In this case α is identiﬁed using this restricted
12

See, for example, Arellano and Bond (1991), Blundell and Bond (1998) and Blundell, Bond and
Windmeijer (2000).
13 See also Bond and Windmeijer (2002).
14 Negative ﬁrst-order serial correlation is expected in the ﬁrst-differenced residuals if the v are
it
serially uncorrelated. Positive serial correlation is expected in the levels residuals due to the presence
of the individual effects ηi .

148

S. R. Bond

instrument set provided T  4. Extensions to models with additional explanatory
(x) variables are also straightforward, and are discussed brieﬂy in the next section.
Moreover whilst we have introduced these GMM estimators for the case where
ﬁrst-differencing is used to eliminate the individual effects, the two key properties
of the ﬁrst-differencing transformation needed here - eliminating the time-invariant
individual effects whilst not introducing disturbances for periods earlier than period
t − 1 into the transformed error term - are shared by a wide class of alternative
transformations. Arellano and Bover (1995) show that numerically identical GMM
estimators can be obtained using any of the alternative transformations in this
class.15
The ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimators described here are straightforward to
compute, as the moment conditions in (2.4) are all linear in the parameter α.16
Under the very mild assumption that the individual effects ηi and the disturbances
vit are uncorrelated, additional moment conditions are available for this model
which are quadratic in α and hence require iterative computational procedures.
Additional linear moment conditions are available under a homoskedasticity assumption. Ahn and Schmidt (1995) characterise the additional moment conditions
in both these cases. Perhaps more useful in practice, however, are additional linear
moment conditions which result from assuming that the initial conditions satisfy
ηi
mean stationarity, so that the series (yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yiT ) have a constant mean 1−α
for each individual i. These are discussed in the next section, after we illustrate the
estimators discussed here for the AR(1) model using data on investment rates for
a panel of UK ﬁrms.
2.1 Example: company investment rates
Table 1 reports estimates of the simple AR(1) speciﬁcation for data on investment
rates for the panel of UK companies used in Bond, Klemm, Newton-Smith, Syed
and Vlieghe (2002). Since the investment data (Iit ) measure gross investment expenditures and the capital stock series (Kit ) is a measure of the net capital stock
at replacement cost, the investment rates yit = (Iit /Kit ) give an approximate
measure of the growth rate in the net capital stock plus a depreciation rate. The
model estimated is a ﬁrst-order autoregressive speciﬁcation as in equation (2.1),
with year-speciﬁc intercepts (ct ) included to account for common cyclical or trend
components in these investment rates




Ii,t−1
Iit
= ct + α
+ (ηi + vit ).
(2.6)
Kit
Ki,t−1
Variation across ﬁrms in depreciation rates provides one motivation for suspecting
the presence of individual-speciﬁc effects in this context. The sample contains 703
15 The corresponding estimators are numerically identical when the panel is balanced (all individuals
have complete data on yit for t = 1, 2, . . . , T ) and all the available linear moment conditions are
exploited. Alternative transformations may lead to more or less efﬁcient estimators when only a subset
of the available instruments are used.
16 Computer programmes that include these estimators include DPD98 for Gauss (Arellano and Bond,
1998), Ox (www.oxmetrics.net), PcGive (www.pcgive.com) and Stata (www.stata.com).

Dynamic panel data models

149

publicly traded UK ﬁrms for which we have consecutive annual data from published
company accounts for a minimum of 4 years between 1987 and 2000. Further details
of the sample and the data are provided in Bond et al. (2002).
The ﬁrst two columns of Table 1 report OLS levels and Within Groups estimates
of the parameter α, together with heteroskedasticity-consistent estimates of the
asymptotic standard errors.17 Recall that the OLS estimate is likely to be biased
upwards and the Within Groups estimate is likely to be biased downwards if the
AR(1) model in (2.6) provides a good representation for this series. Certainly the
OLS estimate is considerably higher than the Within Groups estimate. The serial
correlation tests m1 and m2 reported for OLS levels test the null hypotheses of
no ﬁrst-order serial correlation and no second-order serial correlation respectively
in the OLS residuals yit − α
yi,t−1 , where α
 is the OLS estimate of α. The test
statistics are asymptotically standard normal under the null of no serial correlation,
and their signs indicate the sign of the estimated autocorrelation coefﬁcients in the
residuals.18 Whilst we might expect to ﬁnd signiﬁcant positive serial correlation at
both ﬁrst order and second order in consistent estimates of these levels residuals,
due to the presence of individual effects, there is no reason to expect this pattern
if the OLS estimate of α, and hence these estimates of the residuals, are seriously
biased. For the Within Groups estimator, the reported test statistics consider serial
correlation in the ﬁrst-differenced residuals, ∆yit − α
∆yi,t−1 , where α
 is here the
Within Groups estimate of α. Similarly, however, the ﬁnding of signiﬁcant secondorder serial correlation in these estimates of the residuals need not indicate that the
AR(1) model is mis-speciﬁed, since this estimate of α and hence these estimates
of the ﬁrst-differenced residuals are likely to be biased.
The third column reports the simple, just-identiﬁed 2SLS estimator for the
equations in ﬁrst-differences, using yi,t−2 as the instrumental variable. This gives
an estimate of α which is signiﬁcantly positive, but well below the OLS estimate and
well above the Within Groups estimate. Whilst we cannot use the Sargan statistic to
test the validity of overidentifying restrictions for this just-identiﬁed estimator, the
pattern of serial correlation in the ﬁrst-differenced residuals is consistent with the
maintained assumption that the vit disturbances are serially uncorrelated, so that
∆vit should have signiﬁcant negative ﬁrst-order serial correlation but no signiﬁcant
second-order serial correlation. We have some evidence that the AR(1) model is
well speciﬁed for this series, and the ranking of the OLS, 2SLS and Within Groups
parameter estimates is in line with what we would expect if this is the case and the
consistent 2SLS estimator is not subject to any serious ﬁnite sample bias in this
context.
The fourth column reports a one-step ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimator for this
speciﬁcation, using only a subset of the potentially available instrument matrix
Zi in (2.3). In particular, only instruments corresponding to yi,t−2 and yi,t−3 are
used here, and columns of Zi containing longer lags for the later ﬁrst-differenced
17

All computations are done using DPD98 for Gauss; see Arellano and Bond (1998).
These test statistics are standardised ﬁrst-order and second-order residual autocovariances; see
Arellano and Bond (1991) for details.
18

150

S. R. Bond

equations are omitted.19 We obtain a modest improvement in the precision of the
parameter estimate from the addition of these additional moment conditions. As
this model is now overidentiﬁed, we can use the Sargan statistic to test the validity
of the overidentifying restrictions. In this case we obtain a χ2 (22) statistic of 23.84,
giving the reported p-value of 0.36.20 Consistent with the evidence from the serial
correlation tests, the null hypothesis that these moment conditions are invalid is not
rejected at any conventional signiﬁcance level.
The ﬁnal column reports the one-step ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimator which
uses the complete set of linear moment restrictions implied by our assumptions that
the vit disturbances are serially uncorrelated and the initial conditions yi1 are predetermined.21 We obtain a further very modest improvement in the precision of the
parameter estimate, and again there is no evidence either from the serial correlation
tests or from the Sargan test that the simple AR(1) model is mis-speciﬁed for this
series.22 Noteworthy is what happens in this case if we consider the two-step version of the GMM estimator. This gives an estimate of 0.1806, with an asymptotic
standard error of 0.0227. Whilst the point estimate is thus similar to the one-step
estimate of 0.1560 reported in the ﬁnal column of Table 1, there is apparently a
reduction of some 30% in the standard error of this estimate. Whilst some gain
in precision could be expected in the presence of heteroskedastic disturbances,
no improvement of this magnitude has ever been reported in simulation studies
for these estimators. Using the ﬁnite sample correction proposed by Windmeijer
(2000) gives a corrected standard error of 0.0314 for this two-step estimate, which
is only marginally lower than the standard error for the one-step estimate reported
in Table 1, and much more in line with the relative efﬁciency of these two estimators reported in simulations. Several studies have noted that inference based on the
conventional asymptotic variance matrix for the two-step GMM estimator can be
highly inaccurate in this context; see, for example, Bond and Windmeijer (2002).

19 Notice however that this estimator still uses many more instrumental variables than the justidentiﬁed 2SLS estimator in column three. The instrument matrix for 2SLS here is the single column
vector Zi = (yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yi,T −2 ) , whilst even the restricted version of (2.3) used in column four
has 23 columns.
20 The Sargan test reported here is based on the minimised value of the associated two-step GMM
estimator, which has a convenient asymptotic χ2 distribution regardless of heteroskedasticity. Notice
that these one-step and two-step GMM estimators are based on the same set of moment conditions, so
that the overidentifying restrictions tested here are those used by both estimators.
21 The instrument matrix Z has 78 columns in this case.
i
22 One reason to compare the estimator based on the full set of instruments in column ﬁve with the
estimator based on the restricted instrument set in column four is that GMM estimators based on too
many moment conditions can be subject to potentially severe overﬁtting biases in small samples. This
does not seem to be an issue here. The loss of relevant information caused by omitting the more distant
lags as instruments will often be very modest, as we ﬁnd here. Bowsher (2000) also notes that the power
of the Sargan test to detect invalid overidentifying restrictions can decline dramatically in ﬁnite samples
if an excessive number of moment conditions are used.

Dynamic panel data models

151

Table 1. Alternative estimates of the AR(1) speciﬁcation for company investment rates
Dependent variable: (I/K)t
OLS

Within

2SLS

GMM

GMM

levels

groups

DIF

DIF

DIF

0.2669

−0.0094

0.1626

0.1593

0.1560

(.0185)

(.0181)

(.0362)

(.0327)

(.0318)

m1

−4.71

−11.36

−10.56

−10.91

−11.12

m2

2.52

−2.02

0.61

0.52

0.46

(I/K)t−1

Sargan
Instruments

(I/K)t−2

.36

.43

(I/K)t−2

(I/K)t−2

(I/K)t−3

(I/K)t−3
:
(I/K)1

Sample: 703 ﬁrms; 4966 observations; 1988–2000
Notes: Year dummies included in all models.
Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses.
m1 and m2 are tests for ﬁrst-order and second-order serial correlation,
asymptotically N(0,1). These test the levels residuals for OLS levels,
and the ﬁrst-differenced residuals in all other columns.
GMM results are one-step estimates with heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors and test statistics.
Sargan is a test of the overidentifying restrictions for the GMM estimators,
asymptotically χ2 . P-value is reported. This test uses the minimised value of
the corresponding two-step GMM estimators.
All computations done using DPD98 for Gauss; see Arellano and Bond (1998).

3 Multivariate dynamic models with persistent series
3.1 Autoregressive-distributed lag models
The GMM estimators for autoregressive models outlined in the previous section
extend in a natural way to autoregressive-distributed lag models of the form
yit = αyi,t−1 + βxit + (ηi + vit );

i = 1, 2, . . . , N ;

t = 2, 3, . . . , T

(3.1)

where xit can be a vector of current and lagged values of additional explanatory
variables. An attractive feature of this approach is that it does not require models
for the xit series to be speciﬁed in order to estimate the parameters (α, β).
Different moment conditions will be available depending on what is assumed
about the correlation between xit and the two components of the error term. For
example, focusing on the case where xit is scalar, we ﬁrst assume that xit is correlated with the individual effects ηi . The potential to obtain consistent parameter
estimates in the presence of this kind of unobserved heterogeneity is another major
advantage of panel data. As both xit and yit are correlated with ηi in this case, a
transformation like ﬁrst-differencing is again required to eliminate the individual
effects from the transformed equations in order to obtain valid moment conditions.

152

S. R. Bond

Maintaining also that the vit disturbances are serially uncorrelated, the xit series
may be endogenous in the sense that xit is correlated with vit and earlier shocks, but
xit is uncorrelated with vi,t+1 and subsequent shocks; predetermined in the sense
that xit and vit are also uncorrelated, but xit may still be correlated with vi,t−1 and
earlier shocks; or strictly exogenous in the sense that xit is uncorrelated with all
past, present and future realisations of vis . If xit is assumed to be endogenous then
it is treated symmetrically with the dependent variable yit . In this case the lagged
values xi,t−2 , xi,t−3 and longer lags (when observed) will be valid instrumental
variables in the ﬁrst-differenced equations for periods t = 3, 4, . . . , T . Maintaining
also that the initial conditions yi1 are predetermined, the complete set of moment
conditions available has the form of (2.4), in which the vector (yi1 , . . . , yi,t−2 )
is replaced by the vector (yi1 , . . . , yi,t−2 , xi1 , . . . , xi,t−2 ) in forming each row of
the instrument matrix Zi in (2.3). Computation of the one-step and two-step ﬁrstdifferenced GMM estimators can then proceed just as in the autoregressive case.
If we make the stronger assumption that there is no contemporaneous correlation and the xit series is predetermined, then xi,t−1 is additionally available as a
valid instrument in the ﬁrst-differenced equation for period t. In this case (yi1 , . . . ,
yi,t−2 ) is replaced by the vector (yi1 , . . . , yi,t−2 , xi1 , . . . , xi,t−2 , xi,t−1 ) to form
the instrument matrix Zi as in (2.3). If we make the much stronger assumption that
xit is strictly exogenous, then the complete time series xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xiT )
will be valid instrumental variables in each of the ﬁrst-differenced equations. In
this case (yi1 , . . . , yi,t−2 ) is replaced by the vector (yi1 , . . . , yi,t−2 , xi ) to form
the instrument matrix.
Whilst the choice between these alternatives may seem a little arbitrary, in
most cases these moment conditions will be overidentifying restrictions, so that
the validity of a particular assumption may be tested using standard GMM tests of
overidentifying restrictions. Difference Sargan tests are useful in this context, as
the set of moment conditions speciﬁed under a relatively weak assumption (e.g. xit
is endogenous) is a strict subset of the set of moment conditions speciﬁed under
a stronger assumption (e.g. xit is predetermined). Letting S denote the Sargan
statistic obtained under the stronger assumption and S  denote the Sargan statistic
obtained under the weaker assumption, the simple difference DS = S − S  is
asymptotically χ2 , and tests the validity of the additional moment conditions used
in the former case; see Arellano and Bond (1991).
Further moment conditions are available if we are willing to assume that xit is
uncorrelated with the unobserved individual effects ηi . The basic difference is that
now we have valid instrumental variables for the untransformed levels equations.
Unfortunately the complete set of moment conditions speciﬁed typically cannot be
written as a set of orthogonality conditions using the error term in the levels equations (ηi + vit ) alone. Efﬁcient estimation combines the set of moment conditions
available for the ﬁrst-differenced equations, described above, with the additional
moment conditions implied for the levels equations under the additional assumption
that xit and ηi are uncorrelated.

Dynamic panel data models

153

For example, if xit is endogenous with respect to vit and uncorrelated with ηi ,
there are a further T − 1 non-redundant additional moment conditions of the form
E [xi,t−1 (ηi + vit )] = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , N and t = 2, 3, . . . , T,
in addition to the set of moment conditions for the ﬁrst-differenced equations described previously.23 This allows the use of xi,t−1 as an instrumental variable in
the levels equation for period t. If xit is either predetermined or strictly exogenous
with respect to vit , there are an additional T non-redundant moment conditions,
given the respective sets of moment conditions for the ﬁrst-differenced equations
under these assumptions. In both cases these can be written as24
E [xit (ηi + vit )] = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , N and t = 2, 3, . . . , T
and E [xi1 (ηi + vi2 )] = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , N ;
see Arellano and Bond (1991) for details.
Estimation then combines the set of moment conditions speciﬁed for the equations in ﬁrst-differences with these additional moment conditions speciﬁed for the
equations in levels. One difference from the case where only ﬁrst-differenced equations are used is that there is no longer a known weight matrix that can be used
to construct a one-step GMM estimator that is asymptotically equivalent to the
optimal two-step GMM estimator, even in the special case of homoskedastic disturbances. The gain in efﬁciency from using the optimal two-step weight matrix is
thus likely to be greater in this context, at least in large samples. Note also that the
Difference Sargan test can be used to test the assumption that xit is uncorrelated
with the individual effects.25
An intermediate case occurs when we are not willing to assume that the level
of the xit variable is uncorrelated with the individual effects, but we are willing to
assume that the ﬁrst-differences ∆xit are uncorrelated with ηi . In this case suitably
lagged values of ∆xis can be used as instrumental variables in the levels equation
for period t; see Arellano and Bover (1995) for details.
3.2 Persistent series
This last observation raises the possibility that lagged differences ∆yi,t−1 may also
be valid instruments for the levels equations in autoregressive models like (2.1).
This turns out to depend on the validity of a stationarity assumption about the
initial conditions yi1 , which
 in Blundell and Bond (1998).
 is discussed in detail
ηi
Speciﬁcally it requires E yi1 − 1−α ηi = 0 for i = 1, . . . , N, so that
the initial conditions do not deviate systematically from the value

ηi
1−α

which

23 This representation is not unique. Note that the use of longer lags of x
is as instruments for the
equations in levels is redundant when all available lags of xis are used as instruments in the ﬁrstdifferenced equations.
24 Again this representation is not unique.
25 Arellano (1993) considers an alternative Wald test of this assumption.

154

S. R. Bond

the model speciﬁes that the yit series for individual i converges towards from
period 2 onwards.26 This stationary mean assumption implies E [∆yi2 ηi ] = 0 for
i = 1, 2, . . . , N , which in turn given the autoregressive structure of the model
and the mild assumption E [∆vit ηi ] = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , N and t = 3, 4, . . . , T
implies the additional T − 2 non-redundant linear moment conditions
E [∆yi,t−1 (ηi + vit )] = 0 for i = 1, 2, . . . , N and t = 3, 4, . . . , T,

(3.2)

in addition to those speciﬁed for the ﬁrst-differenced equations in (2.4). Estimation
again requires a combination of equations in ﬁrst-differences with equations in
levels to exploit this complete set of moment conditions. One further observation is
that under these additional assumptions, the quadratic moment conditions discussed
earlier can also be shown to be redundant when the linear moment conditions (2.4)
and (3.2) are all exploited.27
The signiﬁcance of these additional moment conditions in the AR(1) model is
that estimation no longer depends exclusively on the ﬁrst-differenced equations, or
more speciﬁcally on the use of lagged levels of the series as instruments for the ﬁrstdifference ∆yi,t−1 . The correlation between lagged levels of the series and ∆yi,t−1
becomes weak if either the true value of the parameter α approaches unity, or if
the ratio var(ηi )/var(vit ) becomes large. In both cases the time series yit becomes
highly persistent and lagged levels provide weak instruments for subsequent ﬁrstdifferences. Indeed if we consider the alternative speciﬁcation
yit = αyi,t−1 + (ηi (1 − α) + vit );

i = 1, 2, . . . , N ;

t = 2, 3, . . . , T,

which approaches a pure random walk as α → 1, then the parameter α is not
identiﬁed using the moment conditions for the ﬁrst-differenced equations (2.4) in
the case when α = 1.
More generally the instruments available for the equations in ﬁrst-differences
are likely to be weak when the individual series have near unit root properties. Instrumental variable estimators can be subject to serious ﬁnite sample biases when
the instruments used are weak.28 Blundell and Bond (1998) show that this applies
to the ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimator for the AR(1) model.29 Table 2 reports a
selection of their simulation results, for both the ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimator
and the extended GMM estimator which uses the additional moment conditions
(3.2). The Within Groups estimator is added here for comparison. Notice that the
ﬁnite sample bias for the ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimator in this context is downwards, and in this experiment where the moment conditions (2.4) are valid but only
26 In a speciﬁcation with period-speciﬁc intercepts or time dummies, the requirement that the mean of
the (yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yiT ) series is constant for each individual can be replaced by the weaker assumption
that these means evolve over time in a common way for the N individuals in the sample - so that the
means are again constant when the series are expressed as deviations from period-speciﬁc means.
27 Further moment conditions are available if the v disturbances are homoskedastic and the initial
it
conditions yi1 satisfy covariance stationarity. See, for example, Ahn and Schmidt (1997) and Kruiniger
(2000).
28 See, for example, Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995) and Staiger and Stock (1997) .
29 Blundell, Bond and Windmeijer (2000) suggest that this is also likely to be a concern in multivariate
models when the individual series are highly persistent.

Dynamic panel data models

155

Table 2. Simulation results for the AR(1) model
Within

GMM

GMM

N

α

groups

DIF

system

100

0.5

−0.0370

0.4641

0.5100

(.0697)

(.2674)

(.1330)

0.8
0.9
500

0.5
0.8
0.9

0.1343

0.4844

0.8101

(.0726)

(.8224)

(.1618)

0.1906

0.2264

0.9405

(.0725)

(.8264)

(.1564)

−0.0360

0.4887

0.5021

(.0310)

(.1172)

(.0632)

0.1364

0.7386

0.7939

(.0328)

(.3085)

(.0779)

0.1930

0.5978

0.9043

(.0330)

(.6407)

(.0999)

Notes: The table reports means (standard deviations) from experiments with T = 4 and 1000
replications. The model is yit = αyi,t−1 +
(ηi + vit ), with var(ηi ) = var(vit ) = 1 and
initial conditions drawn from the covariance stationary distribution for yi1 . Results are reported
for two-step GMM estimators.
Source: Blundell and Bond (1998) and author’s
calculations.

weakly identify the parameter α, this ﬁnite sample bias appears to be in the direction of the Within Groups estimator. By contrast the extended estimator, denoted
system GMM, has much smaller ﬁnite sample bias and much greater precision
when estimating autoregressive parameters using persistent series.
This emphasis on the time series properties of the series might appear surprising
given our focus on micro panels, with a large number of cross-section units and
a small number of time periods. In this context the asymptotic distribution theory
relies on N becoming large with T treated as ﬁxed, and the asymptotic normality of
these GMM estimators does not depend on the time series properties of the series.
The issue here is that parameters may not be identiﬁed using ﬁrst-differenced GMM
estimators when the series are random walks, and more generally identiﬁcation may
be weak when the series are near unit root processes. As Table 2 illustrates, ﬁnite
sample biases can be severe when the instruments available are weak. Investigating
the time series properties of the individual series is therefore to be recommended
when using these GMM estimators for dynamic panel data models, and the validity
of the additional moment conditions discussed in this section should be given careful
consideration if the series being used are found to be highly persistent. An example
which illustrates these issues is presented in the next section.

156

S. R. Bond

The extended system GMM estimator also extends straightforwardly to autoregressive-distributed lag models like (3.1). In this context Blundell and Bond (2000)
show that a sufﬁcient condition for the validity of additional moment conditions
like (3.2) is that the (yit , xit ) series each satisfy a mean stationarity assumption.
However weaker conditions can also sufﬁce. For example, within our sample the
ﬁrst-differences ∆yit can be expressed as
∆yit = α

t−2

∆yi2 +

t−3

s=0

s

α β∆xi,t−s +

t−3


αs ∆vi,t−s

s=0

for i = 1, 2, . . . , N and t = 3, 4, . . . , T .
Thus if α < 1 and the same model has generated the yit series for sufﬁciently long
prior to our sample period for any inﬂuence of the true initial conditions to have
become negligible, then orthogonality between ∆yit and ηi would be implied if all
the ∆xit series are also uncorrelated with the individual effects. Again it should be
noted that the validity of these additional moment conditions for the levels equations
can be tested, for example using Difference Sargan tests.
3.3 Example: production function
We illustrate the use of GMM estimators which exploit these additional moment
restrictions for the equations in levels in a multivariate context by considering
the dynamic production function speciﬁcation estimated in Blundell and Bond
(2000).30 A nice feature of this example is that it illustrates why adopting a dynamic
econometric speciﬁcation may sometimes be necessary for identifying parameters
of interest, even when the dynamics themselves are not the principal focus of
attention.
Blundell and Bond (2000) consider the Cobb-Douglas production function
yit = βn nit + βk kit + γt + (ηi + vit + mit )
vit = αvi,t−1 + eit
|α| < 1

(3.3)

eit , mit ∼ M A(0)
where yit is log sales of ﬁrm i in year t, nit is log employment, kit is log capital stock
and γt is a year-speciﬁc intercept reﬂecting, for example, a common technology
shock. Of the error components, ηi is an unobserved time-invariant ﬁrm-speciﬁc
effect, vit is a possibly autoregressive (productivity) shock and mit reﬂects serially
uncorrelated (measurement) errors. Constant returns to scale would imply βn +
βk = 1, but this is not necessarily imposed.
Interest is in the consistent estimation of the parameters (βn , βk , α) when the
number of ﬁrms (N ) is large and the number of years (T ) is ﬁxed. It is assumed that
both employment (nit ) and capital (kit ) are potentially correlated with the ﬁrmspeciﬁc effects (ηi ), and with both productivity shocks (eit ) and measurement
errors (mit ).
30 The discussion in this section draws heavily on that in Blundell and Bond (2000) and that in
Blundell, Bond and Windmeijer (2000).

Dynamic panel data models

157

In this case there are no valid moment conditions for the static speciﬁcation
(3.3) if the disturbances vit are indeed autoregressive (α = 0). However this model
has a dynamic (common factor) representation
yit = βn nit − αβn ni,t−1 + βk kit − αβk ki,t−1 + αyi,t−1
+(γt − αγt−1 ) + (ηi (1 − α) + eit + mit − αmi,t−1 )

(3.4)

or
yit = π1 nit + π2 ni,t−1 + π3 kit + π4 ki,t−1 + π5 yi,t−1 + γt∗ + (ηi∗ + wit ) (3.5)
subject to two non-linear (common factor) restrictions π2 = −π1 π5 and π4 =
−π3 π5 . Whilst the error term (vit + mit ) in (3.3) is serially correlated at all lag
lengths, the error term wit is serially uncorrelated if there are no measurement
errors (wit = eit with var (mit ) = 0), or wit ∼ M A(1) if there are transient
measurement errors in some of the series. In either case we can obtain consistent
estimates of the unrestricted parameter vector π = (π1 , π2 , π3 , π4 , π5 ) using the
GMM methods outlined in the previous sections. Given consistent estimates of
π and var(π), the common factor restrictions can be (tested and) imposed using
minimum distance to obtain consistent estimates of the restricted parameter vector
(βn , βk , α).
Blundell and Bond (2000) consider the time series properties of these series and
report estimates of this production function using a balanced panel of 509 R&Dperforming US manufacturing companies observed for 8 years, 1982-89, similar to
that used in Mairesse and Hall (1996). Capital stock and employment are measured
at the end of the ﬁrm’s accounting year, and sales is used as a proxy for output.
Further details of the data construction can be found in Mairesse and Hall (1996).
Table 3 reports simple AR(1) speciﬁcations for the three series, employment
(nit ), capital (kit ) and sales (yit ). All three series are found to be highly persistent,
although even using OLS levels estimates none appears to have an exact unit root.31
For the employment series, both differenced and system GMM estimators suggest
an autoregressive coefﬁcient around 0.9, and differenced GMM does not appear
to be seriously biased. However for capital and sales, whilst system GMM again
suggests an autoregressive coefﬁcient around 0.9, the differenced GMM estimates
are found to be signiﬁcantly lower, and close to the corresponding Within Groups
estimates. These downward biases in differenced GMM estimates of the AR(1)
models for capital and sales are consistent with the ﬁnite sample biases expected
in the case of highly persistent series, illustrated in Table 2. Indeed the surprise
is that differenced GMM gives reasonable results for the employment series. One
difference is that the variance of the ﬁrm-speciﬁc effects is found to be lower,
relative to the variance of transitory shocks, for the employment series. The ratio of
these variances is around 1.2 for employment, but 2.2 for capital and 1.7 for sales.
Table 4 presents results for the basic production function, not imposing constant returns to scale, for a range of estimators. Results are reported for both the
unrestricted model (3.5) and the restricted model (3.3), where the common factor
31 See Bond, Nauges and Windmeijer (2002) and Hall and Mairesse (2001) for further discussion of
unit root tests in this context.

158

S. R. Bond

Table 3. AR(1) speciﬁcations for the production series
Labour (nt )
nt−1

OLS

Within

GMM-DIF

GMM-SYS

GMM-SYS

levels

groups

t−3

t−3

t−4

0.986

0.723

0.920

0.923

(.002)

(.022)

(.062)

(.033)

m1

4.16

−8.51

−7.62

−8.99

m2

2.67

0.60

0.44

0.43

Sargan

.040

Dif-Sar

.056
.387

Capital (kt )
kt−1

0.987

0.733

0.768

0.925

(.002)

(.027)

(.070)

(.021)

m1

7.72

−6.82

−5.80

−6.51

m2

2.29

−1.73

−1.73

−1.81

.563

.627

Sargan
Dif-Sar

.562

Sales (yt )
yt−1

0.988

0.693

0.775

0.963

0.893

(.002)

(.025)

(.063)

(.048)

(.063)

m1

5.70

−7.35

−5.95

−7.15

−6.35

m2

0.97

−2.37

−2.46

−2.53

−2.63

.025

.092

Sargan
Dif-Sar

.040

.134

See notes to Table 1.
Dif-Sar is the Difference Sargan test. P-value is reported.
Source: Blundell and Bond (2000).

restrictions are tested and imposed using minimum distance. The results here are for
one-step GMM estimators, with heteroskedasticity-consistent asymptotic standard
errors reported.
As expected in the presence of ﬁrm-speciﬁc effects, OLS levels appears to give
an upwards-biased estimate of the coefﬁcient on the lagged dependent variable,
whilst Within Groups appears to give a downwards-biased estimate of this coefﬁcient. Note that even using OLS, the hypothesis that α = 1 is rejected, and even
using Within Groups the hypothesis that α = 0 is rejected. Although the pattern
of signs on current and lagged regressors in the unrestricted models are consistent
with the AR(1) error-component speciﬁcation, the common factor restrictions are
rejected for both these estimators. They also reject constant returns to scale.32

32 The table reports p-values from minimum distance tests of the common factor restrictions and Wald
tests of the constant returns to scale restrictions.

Dynamic panel data models

159

Table 4. Production function estimates
OLS

Within

GMM DIF

GMM DIF

GMM SYS

levels

groups

t−2

t−3

t−2

t−3

0.479

0.488

0.513

0.499

0.629

0.472

(0.029)

(0.030)

(0.089)

(0.101)

(0.106)

(0.112)

−0.423

−0.023

0.073

−0.147

−0.092

−0.278

(0.031)

(0.034)

(0.093)

(0.113)

(0.108)

(0.120)

0.235

0.177

0.132

0.194

0.361

0.398

(0.035)

(0.034)

(0.118)

(0.154)

(0.129)

(0.152)

−0.212

−0.131

−0.207

−0.105

−0.326

−0.209

(0.035)

(0.025)

(0.095)

(0.110)

(0.104)

(0.119)

0.922

0.404

0.326

0.426

0.462

0.602

(0.011)

(0.029)

(0.052)

(0.079)

(0.051)

(0.098)

m1

−2.60

−8.89

−6.21

−4.84

−8.14

−6.53

m2

−2.06

−1.09

−1.36

−0.69

−0.59

−0.35

Sargan

−

−

.001

.073

.000

.032

Dif-Sar

−

−

−

−

.001

.102

nt
nt−1
kt
kt−1
yt−1

βn
βk
α

GMM SYS

0.538

0.488

0.583

0.515

0.773

0.479

(0.025)

(0.030)

(0.085)

(0.099)

(0.093)

(0.098)

0.266

0.199

0.062

0.225

0.231

0.492

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.079)

(0.126)

(0.075)

(0.074)

0.964

0.512

0.377

0.448

0.509

0.565

(0.006)

(0.022)

(0.049)

(0.073)

(0.048)

(0.078)

Comfac

.000

.000

.014

.711

.012

.772

CRS

.000

.000

.000

.006

.922

.641

See notes to Tables 1 and 3.
Comfac is a minimum distance test of the non-linear common factor restrictions imposed in the
restricted models. P-values are reported.
CRS is a Wald test of the constant returns to scale hypothesis βn + βk = 1 in the restricted
models. P-values are reported.
Source: Blundell and Bond (2000).

The validity of lagged levels dated t − 2 as instruments in the ﬁrst-differenced
equations is clearly rejected by the Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions.33
This is consistent with the presence of measurement errors. Instruments dated t − 3
(and earlier) are not rejected, and the test of common factor restrictions is easily
passed in these ﬁrst-differenced GMM results. However the estimated coefﬁcient
on the lagged dependent variable is barely higher than the Within Groups estimate,
suggesting the possibility of serious ﬁnite sample bias here. Indeed the differenced
GMM parameter estimates are all very close to the Within Groups results. Serious
33 Again the Sargan tests reported here are based on the minimised values of the associated two-step
GMM estimators.

160

S. R. Bond

ﬁnite sample bias associated with weak instruments may well be suspected in this
context, given the time series properties of these series discussed above. The estimate of βk is low and statistically weak, and the constant returns to scale restriction
is rejected.
The validity of lagged levels dated t − 3 (and earlier) as instruments in the
ﬁrst-differenced equations, combined with lagged ﬁrst-differences dated t − 2 as
instruments in the levels equations, appears to be marginal in the system GMM estimator. However the Difference Sargan statistic that speciﬁcally tests the additional
moment conditions used in the levels equations accepts their validity at the 10%
level. The system GMM parameter estimates appear to be reasonable. The estimated
coefﬁcient on the lagged dependent variable is higher than the Within Groups estimate, but well below the OLS levels estimate. The common factor restrictions are
easily accepted, and the estimate of βk is both higher and better determined than
the differenced GMM estimate. The constant returns to scale restriction is easily
accepted in the system GMM results.
Blundell and Bond (2000) explore this data in more detail and conclude that the
system GMM estimates in the ﬁnal column of Table 4 are their preferred results.
They also report that when constant returns to scale is imposed on the production
function - it is not rejected in the preferred system GMM results - then the results
obtained using the ﬁrst-differenced GMM estimator become more similar to the
system GMM estimates.

4 Summary and conclusions
This paper has reviewed the use of Generalised Method of Moments estimators
in the context of single equation, autoregressive-distributed lag models estimated
from micro panels with a large number of cross-section units observed for a small
number of time periods. These methods are particularly useful when the model
of interest contains endogenous or predetermined explanatory variables, but the
processes generating these series are not completely speciﬁed.
These GMM estimators can be used to obtain consistent parameter estimates in
a wide range of microeconometric applications. However we have emphasised that
they may be subject to large ﬁnite sample biases when the instruments available
are weak, and this is particularly likely to be a problem when using the basic ﬁrstdifferenced estimators with series that are highly persistent. Careful investigation of
the time series properties of the individual series, and comparison of the consistent
GMM estimators to simpler estimators like OLS levels and Within Groups, which
are likely to be biased in opposite directions in the context of coefﬁcients on lagged
dependent variables in short T panels, can help in detecting and avoiding these
biases in applied research.

Dynamic panel data models

161

References

Ahn S C, Schmidt P (1995) Efﬁcient estimation of models for dynamic panel data. Journal of Econometrics 68: 5–28
Ahn S C, Schmidt P (1997) Efﬁcient estimation of dynamic panel data models: alternative assumptions
and simpliﬁed estimation. Journal of Econometrics 76: 309–321
Anderson T W, Hsiao C (1981) Estimation of dynamic models with error components. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 76: 598–606
Anderson T W, Hsiao C (1982) Formulation and estimation of dynamic models using panel data. Journal
of Econometrics 18: 47–82
Arellano, M (1993) On the testing of correlated effects with panel data. Journal of Econometrics 59:
87–97
Arellano M, Bond S R (1991) Some tests of speciﬁcation for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an
application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies 58: 277–297
Arellano M, Bond S R (1998) Dynamic panel data estimation using DPD98 for GAUSS. Mimeo, Institute
for Fiscal Studies, London (http://www.ifs.org.uk/staff/steve b.shtml)
Arellano M, Bover O (1995) Another look at the instrumental-variable estimation of error-components
models. Journal of Econometrics 68: 29–52
Arellano M, Honore B (2001) Panel data models: some recent developments. In: Heckman J J, Leamer
E E (eds) Handbook of econometrics, Vol 5. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Binder M., Hsiao C, Pesaran M H (2000) Estimation and inference in short panel vector autoregressions
with unit roots and cointegration. University of Cambridge DAE Working Paper No. 0003
Blundell R W, Bond S R (1998) Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models.
Journal of Econometrics 87: 115–143
Blundell R W, Bond S R (2000) GMM estimation with persistent panel data: an application to production
functions. Econometric Reviews 19: 321–340
Blundell R W, Bond S R, Windmeijer F (2000) Estimation in dynamic panel data models: improving
on the performance of the standard GMM estimator. In: Baltagi B (ed) Advances in econometrics,
Vol 15. Nonstationary panels, panel cointegration, and dynamic panels. JAI Elsevier, Amsterdam
Blundell R W, Smith R J (1991) Initial conditions and efﬁcient estimation in dynamic panel data models.
Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 20/21: 109–123
Bond S R, Klemm A, Newton-Smith R, Syed M H, Vlieghe G (2002) The roles of expected proﬁtability,
Tobin’s q and cash ﬂow in econometric models of company investment. Mimeo, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, London
Bond S R , Nauges C, Windmeijer F (2002) Unit roots and identiﬁcation in autoregressive panel data
models: a comparison of alternative tests. Mimeo, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London
Bond S R, Windmeijer F (2002) Finite sample inference for GMM estimators in linear panel data models.
Cemmap Working Paper Series No. CWP04/02, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London
Bound J, Jaeger D A, Baker R M (1995) Problems with instrumental variables estimation when the
correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory variable is weak. Journal of
the American Statistical Association 90: 443–450
Bowsher C (2000) On testing overidentifying restrictions in dynamic panel data models. Nufﬁeld College
Discussion Paper in Economics, no. 2000-W28
Hall B H, Mairesse J (2001) Testing for unit roots in panel data: an exploration using real and simulated
data. Mimeo, UC Berkeley
Hansen L P (1982) Large sample properties of generalised method of moment estimators. Econometrica
50: 1029–1054
Holtz-Eakin D, Newey W, Rosen H S (1988) Estimating vector autoregressions with panel data. Econometrica 56: 1371–1396
Hsiao C (1986) Analysis of panel data. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Kruiniger H (2000) GMM estimation of dynamic panel data models with persistent data. QMW, University of London, Dept. of Economics Working Paper Series No. 428
Mairesse J, Hall B H (1996) Estimating the productivity of research and development in French and US
manufacturing ﬁrms: an exploration of simultaneity issues with GMM methods. In: Wagner K, Van

162

S. R. Bond

Ark B (eds) International productivity differences and their explanations, pp 285–315. Elsevier,
Amsterdam
Nickell S J (1981) Biases in dynamic models with ﬁxed effects. Econometrica 49: 1417–1426
Nickell S J (1986) Dynamic models of labor demand. In: Ashenfelter O, Layard R (eds) Handbook of
labor economics, Vol 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Sargan J D (1958) The estimation of economic relationships using instrumental variables. Econometrica
26: 329–338
Sargan J D (1988) Testing for misspeciﬁcation after estimation using instrumental variables. In: Maasoumi E (ed) Contributions to econometrics: John Denis Sargan, Vol I. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Staiger D, Stock J H (1997) Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments. Econometrica 65:
557–586
Verbeek M (1996) Pseudo panel data. In: Matyas L, Sevestre P (eds) The econometrics of panel data,
2nd edn. Kluwer, Amsterdam
Windmeijer F (2000) A ﬁnite sample correction for the variance of linear two-step GMM estimators.
Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper Series No. W00/19, London

