Who Benefits from Universal Child Care?
Estimating Marginal Returns to Early
Child Care Attendance

Thomas Cornelissen
University of York

Christian Dustmann
University College London and Center for Research and Analysis of Migration

Anna Raute
Queen Mary University of London

Uta Schönberg
University College London, Center for Research and Analysis of Migration,
and Institute for Employment Research

We examine heterogeneous treatment effects of a universal child care
program in Germany by exploiting variation in attendance caused by a
reform that led to a large expansion staggered across municipalities.
Drawing on novel administrative data from the full population of compulsory school entry examinations, we find that children with lower
(observed and unobserved) gains are more likely to select into child
care than children with higher gains. Children from disadvantaged
backgrounds are less likely to attend child care than children from advantaged backgrounds but have larger treatment effects because of
their worse outcome when not enrolled in child care.
We are indebted to the Health Department of Lower Saxony for providing the data and
particularly grateful to Johannes Dreesman for his advice and invaluable support with data
Electronically published November 5, 2018
[ Journal of Political Economy, 2018, vol. 126, no. 6]
© 2018 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/2018/12606-0004$10.00

2356

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2357

I. Introduction
Preschool and early childhood programs are generally considered effective means of influencing child development (see, e.g., Currie and Almond 2011; Ruhm and Waldfogel 2012) both because many skills are
best learned when young (e.g., Shonkoff and Phillips 2000) and because
the longer payoff period makes such learning more productive (Becker
1964). There may also be important “dynamic complementarities” of
early learning with acquisition of human capital at later stages (Cunha
and Heckman 2007; Heckman 2007; Aizer and Cunha 2012). In recognition of these benefits, most European countries, including the United
Kingdom, France, Germany, and all Nordic nations, offer publicly provided universal child care (or preschool) programs aimed at promoting
children’s social and cognitive development. In the United States, which
offers no nationwide universal preschool program, an important goal of
the previous Obama administration’s Zero to Five Plan is to create similar initiatives.1
Yet despite enormous policy interest, evidence of the effectiveness of
child care (or preschool) programs is scarce and far from unified. For
example, proponents of child care programs often cite targeted programs such as Head Start or the Perry Preschool Project, which have generated large long-term gains for participants.2 Evidence on the effectiveness of universal child care programs targeted at all children, on the
other hand, is mixed, with effects ranging from negative to positive.3
One important reason why targeted child care programs yield larger returns than large-scale universal programs may be treatment effect het-

management. Christian Dustmann acknowledges funding from the European Research
Council under Advanced Grant 323992 and from the Norface Welfare State Future program. Information on data sets is provided as supplementary material online.
1
State-level programs (often referred to as prekindergarten) are currently in place in
Georgia, Florida, New Jersey, New York, and Oklahoma and have been enacted or expanded
in recent years in Alabama, Michigan, Minnesota, and Montana. A subsidized universal
child care program also exists in the Province of Quebec, Canada.
2
See, e.g., the papers by Currie and Thomas (1995), Garces, Thomas, and Currie
(2002), Heckman et al. (2010a, 2010b), Carneiro and Ginja (2014), and the synthesis in
Elango et al. (2016).
3
For example, whereas Berlinski, Galiani, and Manacorda (2008), Berlinski, Galiani, and
Gertler (2009), Havnes and Mogstad (2011), and Felfe, Nollenberger, and Rodriguez-Planas
(2015) find positive mean effects of an expansion in pre-elementary education in Argentina,
Uruguay, Norway, and Spain, respectively; Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2008, 2018) report negative mean impacts of highly subsidized universal child care in Quebec on behavioral and
health outcomes in the short and longer run. Datta Gupta and Simonsen (2010) also find
no evidence that enrollment in center-based care at age 3 in Denmark improves child outcomes, and Magnuson, Ruhm, and Waldfogel (2007) find mixed effects of pre-K attendance
in the United States, including positive short-lived effects on academic skills and negative
and more persistent effects on behavioral outcomes. Baker (2011) and Elango et al. (2016) provide extensive reviews of this literature.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2358

journal of political economy

erogeneity; that is, the former target children from disadvantaged backgrounds who may benefit more from attending child care programs than
the average child, for instance, because they experience lower-quality
care in the untreated state (i.e., a worse home environment) but a similar environment in the treated state (because child care programs are of
similar quality).4
In this paper, we assess treatment effect heterogeneity in a universal
preschool or child care program aimed at 3–6-year-olds in Germany.
Our goal is to better understand which children benefit most from the
program and whether treatment effect heterogeneity can help reconcile
the divergent evidence on targeted and universal child care programs.
Specifically, we apply the marginal treatment effects (MTE) framework
introduced by Björklund and Moffitt (1987) and generalized by Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2005, 2007), which relates the heterogeneity in
the treatment effect to observed and unobserved heterogeneity in the
propensity for child care enrollment. Such a framework produces a more
complete picture of effect heterogeneity than the conventional instrumental variable (IV) analysis typically adopted in the literature.
The study context offers two key advantages: First, it allows us to exploit a reform during the 1990s that entitled every child in Germany to a
heavily subsidized half-day child care placement from the third birthday
to school entry. While the reform somewhat increased attendance rates of
4-year-olds who attend child care for 2 years, it mainly affected the share
of children who start child care at age 3 and attend child care for 3 years
(an increase from 41 percent to 67 percent, on average, over the program
rollout period). We therefore define our baseline treatment as attending
child care for (at least) 3 years (which we refer to as “early attendance”)
but also show results that explicitly take into account the multivalued nature of our treatment and distinguish between attending child care for 1,
2, or 3 years. The expansion in publicly provided child care was staggered
across municipalities, creating variation in the availability of child care
slots (our instrument) not only across space but also across cohorts. It
thus permits a tighter design for handling nonrandom selection into
child care than is typical in the related literature that estimates marginal
treatment effects. Second, it offers the unique feature that prior to school
entry at age 6, all children must undergo compulsory school entry exams
administered by pediatricians. We have obtained rare administrative data

4
In line with this argument, a recent excellent synthesis of the literature on early childhood education by Elango et al. (2016) concludes that high-quality programs targeted to
children from disadvantaged backgrounds (including Head Start) have positive effects
when the effect is measured against the counterfactual of home care but that the effects
of universal programs are more ambiguous and crucially depend on the alternative setting
that they are substituting for.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2359

from these school entry examinations for the entire population of children
in one large region, providing us with a measure of overall school readiness
(which determines whether the child is held back from school entry for another year), as well as measures of motor skills and health, including information on overweight. These indicators are important predictors of academic success and health later in life (e.g., Grissmer et al. 2010; Wang
et al. 2011).
Unlike many previous studies that use administrative data on child
outcomes, we also observe individual child care attendance, which is crucial to our implementation of the MTE framework.5 We match the examination data with survey data on the local child care supply in each municipality and base our instrument on changes in the local availability of
child care, capturing only arguably exogenous changes in supply (conditional on municipality and cohort effects).
We find substantial heterogeneity in returns to early child care attendance with respect to both observed and unobserved characteristics.
Children of immigrant ancestry (hereafter referred to as “minority children”) are less likely to attend child care early but experience higher returns in terms of overall school readiness than native children, which
points to a reverse selection on gains based on observed characteristics.
The selection on unobserved characteristics reinforces this finding: for
our primary outcome of overall school readiness, children with unobserved characteristics that predispose them to early child care entry (“lowresistance children”) benefit the least from early child care attendance,
whereas those least likely to enter (“high-resistance children”) benefit the
most. As a consequence, the effect of treatment on the untreated (TUT) exceeds the average treatment effect (ATE), which in turn exceeds the effect
of treatment on the treated (TT), with TUT being strongly positive and statistically significant and TT being negative. We confirm a pattern of reverse
selection on gains when modeling treatment as an ordered choice of attending child care for either 1, 2, or 3 years rather than as a binary decision of
attending child care for 3 years or less. Because conventional IV methods
typically estimate one overall effect, they do not detect such important treatment effect heterogeneity.
By digging deeper into the reasons for these findings, we show that the
higher returns to treatment for high- versus low-resistance children are
5
Most papers exploiting child care reforms focus on intention-to-treat effects, partly because information on individual child care attendance is unavailable (see, e.g., Baker et al.
2008; Havnes and Mogstad 2011, 2015; Felfe et al. 2015). Without information on individual treatment status, however, it is impossible to determine whether heterogeneity in
intention-to-treat effects is caused by the differential take-up of children or by heterogeneous responses to child care attendance. For example, larger intention-to-treat effects
at the bottom or middle part of the outcome distribution found by Havnes and Mogstad
(2015) may be driven either by differences in child care take-up or by differences in the
impacts of uptake.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2360

journal of political economy

driven by worse outcomes in the untreated state—which in the German
context is almost exclusively family care by either parents or grandparents—whereas outcomes in the treated state are more homogeneous,
in line with the relatively small quality differences between child care programs in our context. Thus, formal child care acts as an equalizer. Our results also suggest that high-resistance children are more likely to come
from more disadvantaged backgrounds.
What, then, explains the pattern of reverse selection on gains revealed
in this paper? One important reason could be that parental decisions
about child care arrangements are based not only on the child’s welfare but also on the parents’ own objectives. For instance, although welleducated parents could provide their children with a high-quality home
environment, they may opt for child care because of their own career concerns and labor market involvement. On the other hand, mothers from disadvantaged or minority backgrounds not only face higher relative child
care costs but may also have lower incentives to participate in the labor market. They may also have a more critical attitude toward publicly provided
child care or underestimate the returns to investment in their children
(see Cunha, Elo, and Culhane 2013). At the same time, the home environment may deprive the children of exposure to peers and the learning activities provided in child care, thereby delaying development.6 Moreover,
throughout the expansion period, child care decisions were made not only
by parents but in case of excess demand also by child care centers. The allocation mechanism adopted by centers, which in addition to the child’s
age as the primary admission criterion was based on mothers’ employment
status and time on the waiting list, may have favored majority and advantaged children, since majority and high-skilled mothers are more likely to
participate in the labor market and also likely to be better informed about
the specific admission process than minority and low-skilled mothers.
In addition to highlighting the importance of heterogeneity both in
the “resistance” to child care enrollment and in children’s responses to
child care attendance, our findings also reconcile the seemingly contradictory results of positive effects for programs targeted at disadvantaged
children but mixed effects for universal programs. In terms of relevant
policy implications, they suggest that parental choices may differ from

6
The positive correlation between parental inputs and parental socioeconomic background is well documented. For example, Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008) provide evidence for a positive relation between maternal education and time spent with children for
both nonworking and working mothers. Hart and Risley (1995) and Rowe (2008) also report that low-socioeconomic-status (SES) mothers talk less and use less varied vocabulary
during interaction with their children than high-SES mothers, with the latter hearing approximately 11,000 utterances a day compared to 700 utterances for the children of lowSES mothers (Hart and Risley; cited in Rowe [2008]).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2361

those that the children themselves would make, potentially supporting
the claim that state involvement in the early child care market may “mimic
the agreements that would occur if children were capable of arranging
for their [own] care” (Becker and Murphy 1988, 1). Our results also imply
that policies that successfully attract high-resistance children not currently
enrolled in early child care may yield large returns. Further, programs targeted at minority and disadvantaged children are likely to be more costeffective and beneficial than universal child care programs.
Our paper makes several important contributions. The sparse research
on heterogeneity in returns to child care typically focuses on treatment
heterogeneity in observed characteristics or estimates quantile treatment
effects (QTE) rather than marginal treatment effects, as we do. For example, consistent with our findings, Cascio and Schanzenbach (2013) show
that the universal preschool programs in Georgia and Oklahoma improved test score outcomes of children from low-income families as late
as eighth grade but had little impact on children from high-income families. In a similar vein, Havnes and Mogstad (2015), by estimating QTE
and local linear regressions by family income, show that children of
low-income parents benefit substantially from the child care expansion
studied, whereas earnings of upper-class children may have suffered.7
Bitler, Hoynes, and Domina (2016) identify the strongest distributional
effects for the Head Start program among children in the lower part of
the outcome distribution. The MTE approach adopted in our study allows us to uncover treatment heterogeneity not only in observed characteristics (as in Cascio and Schanzenbach [2013]) but also in unobserved
characteristics. In addition, it has a number of advantages over the QTE
approach adopted by Havnes and Mogstad (2015) and Bitler et al.
(2016): While identifying distributional changes without additional assumptions, QTE identifies the distribution of individual-level treatment
effects only under a rank invariance assumption.8 Moreover, by relating
treatment effects to the participation decision, MTE is informative about
the nature of selection into treatment and allows various treatment effects like TT and TUT to be computed.
The only two recent studies we know of that use an MTE framework to
estimate heterogeneity in returns to early child care attendance with respect to unobserved characteristics are Kline and Walters (2016) and
7
Using a similar approach, Kottelenberg and Lehrer (2017) find substantial heterogeneity in distributional effects for the Quebec Family Policy.
8
The rank invariance assumption (or rank preservation; see Elango et al. 2016) is necessary to interpret the QTE as the treatment effect of the individual at the qth quantile of
the outcome distribution in the untreated state and implies, as discussed by Chernozhukov
and Hansen (2005), that a common unobserved factor determines the ranking of a given
person in both the treated and untreated states. The MTE approach, in contrast, allows
unobserved factors to differently affect outcomes in the treated and untreated states.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2362

journal of political economy

Felfe and Lalive (2018). The former evaluates a targeted child care program (Head Start) with an emphasis on multiple untreated states (i.e.,
home care vs. other subsidized public child care), whereas the latter examines a younger population of mostly 1- and 2-year-old children. In contrast, we study a universal child care program in which the untreated state
is almost exclusively home care and concentrate on 3–4-year-old children
who are at the heart of the current policy debate in the United States and
Europe.9
Our study also contributes to the growing literature that estimates marginal treatment effects in different contexts, most of which has focused
on returns to schooling at the college level (see, e.g., Carneiro, Heckman,
and Vytlacil [2011] for the United States; Balfe [2015] for the United
Kingdom; Nybom [2017] for Sweden; and Kaufmann [2014] for Mexico)
or secondary school level (e.g., Carneiro et al. 2017), typically producing
evidence for a strong self-selection into treatment based on net gains.10
Our findings, in contrast, show that when someone other than the treatment subject (e.g., the parents or an administrator) decides on enrollment (the intervention), the relation between selection and gains may
be reversed so that individuals with the highest enrollment resistance
benefit most from the treatment.11
We deviate from the existing MTE literature in the field of education by
adopting a tighter identification strategy that exploits variation in the instrument not only across areas (the main variation used in existing studies) but also across cohorts, thus enabling us to control for time-constant
unobserved area characteristics. An additional strength is that the exogenous variation from a strong, sustained expansion of child care slots creates common support in the estimated (unconditional) propensity score
over virtually the full unit interval. While rare in MTE applications, this is
crucial to compute the TT and the TUT, which heavily weight individuals

9
In line with our findings and consistent with those of Bitler et al. (2016), Kline and
Walters (2016) uncover a pattern of reverse selection on gains for Head Start attendance
when the nontreated state is home care. Felfe and Lalive (2018), in contrast, do not find
general evidence for reverse selection on gains, possibly because they study the effects of
child care attendance for a younger group of children than we do.
10
In an important exception (in a context other than early child care attendance),
Aakvik, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2005) find evidence in line with reverse selection on gains
in the context of a vocational rehabilitation program in Norway. As in our context, the decision whether to enroll in the program is a joint decision by the caseworker and the individual. The unexpected pattern of reverse selection may be explained by cream-skimming
of individuals into training by caseworkers on the basis of their employability rather than
their marginal gains from training.
11
The MTE framework has also been applied to measure the marginal treatment effects
of foster care on future outcomes (Doyle 2007), heterogeneity in the impacts of comprehensive schools on long-term health behavior (Basu, Jones, and Rosa Dias 2014), and heterogeneity in the effects of disability insurance receipt on labor supply (Maestas, Mullen,
and Strand 2013; French and Song 2014).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2363

at the extremes of the treatment propensity distribution, without having
to extrapolate out of the common support.12
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II outlines the empirical framework and the method for estimating the marginal returns to child care attendance. Sections III and IV describe the data, the main features of the
German public child care system, and the child care reform. Section V reports our main findings on treatment effect heterogeneity and its relation
to the pattern of selection into treatment. Section VI then offers a possible
explanation for the main pattern of findings and discusses policy simulations. Section VII concludes the paper with a discussion of policy implications.
II. Estimating Marginal Returns to Child Care
Attendance
A.

Baseline Model Setup (Binary Treatment)

We assess the extent and pattern of treatment effect heterogeneity with
respect to both observed and unobserved characteristics using the
MTE framework (Björklund and Moffitt 1987; Heckman 1997; Heckman
and Vytlacil 1999, 2005, 2007). We use Y0i and Y1i to denote the potential
outcome (from the school entrance exams) for individual i in the nontreated and the treated state, respectively (with Di 5 1 denoting treatment). We model the potential outcomes Yji as a function of the observed
control variables Xi (e.g., child gender, age, and minority status) and
dummies for municipality (Ri) and examination cohort (Ti ):
Yji 5 Xi bj 1 Ri a 1 Ti t 1 Uji ,

j 5 0, 1:

(1)

Following Brinch, Mogstad, and Wiswall (2017), we interpret equation
(1) as a linear projection of Yj on (X, R, T ), which implies that by definition, Uj is normalized to E½Uj jX 5 x, R 5 r , T 5 t  5 0.13
For selection into treatment Di (defined in our baseline specification
as child care attendance for at least 3 years), we use the following latent
index model:

12
For instance, the common support in French and Song (2014) ranges from 0.45 to
0.85 (as depicted by French and Taber [2011]), while that in Felfe and Lalive (2018) ranges
between 0 and 0.5. Carneiro et al. (2011), in contrast, achieve nearly full common support
by combining four different instruments.
13
The coefficient vector, defined as ð bj a t Þ0 5 ½ðX , R, T Þ0 ðX , R, T Þ21 ðX , R, T Þ0 Yj ,
should therefore be interpreted in terms of partial correlations rather than as a causal
or structural parameter. Other studies, such as Aakvik et al. (2005) and Carneiro et al.
(2011, 2017), instead invoke independence of (X, R, T ) and Uj, in which case ð bj a t Þ0
and Uj are defined as structural or causal.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2364

journal of political economy
Di* 5 Zi bd 2 Vi ,
Di 5 1 if Di* ≥ 0,

Di 5 0

(2)
otherwise,

where Z 5 ðX , R, T , Z~ Þ, implying that Z includes the same covariates (X,
R, T ) as the outcome equation (1) and an instrument Z~ excluded from
the outcome equation.14 In our application, Z~ is local child care supply
as measured by the child care coverage rate 3 years prior to the school
entrance examination. Because the error term Vi enters the selection
equation (2) with a negative sign, it embodies the unobserved characteristics that make individuals less likely to receive treatment. We thus label
Vi “unobserved resistance” or “distaste” for treatment.
Equation (1) implies that the individual treatment effect (the difference between the potential outcomes in the treated and untreated
states) is given by Y1i 2 Y0i 5 Xi ðb1 2 b0 Þ 1 U1i 2 U0i . Treatment effect
heterogeneity may thus result from both observed (differences between
Xi b1 and Xi b0) and unobserved characteristics (differences between U1i
and U0i).15 A key feature of the MTE approach is that it allows the unobserved gain from treatment (U1i 2 U0i ) to be correlated with unobserved
characteristics that affect selection (Vi). In the remainder of the exposition, we drop the i index to simplify notation.
In the MTE literature, it is customary to trace out the treatment effect
against the quantiles of the distribution of V rather than against its absolute values, in line with the following transformation of the selection rule
in equation (2):
Z bd 2 V ≥ 0 ⇔ Z bd ≥ V ⇔ FðZ bd Þ ≥ FðV Þ,
with F denoting the cumulative distribution function of V (in our application, a standard normal distribution). The term F(Z bd), also denoted
by FðZ bd Þ ; P ðZ Þ, is the propensity score (the probability that an individual with observed characteristics Z will receive treatment), and F(V ),
denoted by FðV Þ ; UD , represents the quantiles of the distribution of
unobserved resistance to treatment V. The marginal treatment effect
as a function of these quantiles can then be expressed as
MTEðX 5 x, UD 5 uD Þ 5 E ðY1 2 Y0 jX 5 x, UD 5 uD Þ,
14
As Vytlacil (2002) points out, additive separability between Zi bd and Vi in the latent
index model in eq. (2) implies monotonicity (or more appropriately uniformity): a change
of the propensity score from P(Z) to P(Z 0 ) shifts individuals either into treatment or out of
treatment.
15
Because the municipality and year dummies are restricted to having the same effect in
the treated and untreated outcome equations, they have no influence on the treatment
effect. We allow all other covariates in X to have different effects in treated vs. untreated
cases except for a set of birth month dummies.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2365

where MTE is the gain from treatment for an individual with observed
characteristics X 5 x who is in the uDth quantile of the V distribution,
implying the individual is indifferent to receiving treatment when having a propensity score P(Z ) equal to uD.
We impose the following assumptions. First, there must be a first stage
in which the instrument Z~ (the child care coverage rate in the municipality) causes variation in the probability of treatment after controlling
for (X, R, T ). This relation does indeed exist in our application (see Sec. V.A
and table 4). Second, Z~ must be independent of the unobserved component of the outcome and selection equation conditional on the observed characteristics and the municipality and cohort dummies; that is,
Z~ ⫫ðU0 , U1 , V ÞjðX , R, T Þ. This assumption requires that the instrument
be as good as randomly assigned conditional on (X, R, T ). It also embodies the exclusion restriction that the child care coverage rate in the municipality 3 years prior to the school entry examination must not directly affect the examination outcome conditional on Di and (X, R, T ). It further
implies that the way in which U1 and U0 depend on V (i.e., the MTE curve)
must not depend on Z~ . We present evidence supporting the validity of our
instrument in Section IV.C. Third, following Brinch et al. (2017), we assume that the marginal treatment effect is additively separable into an observed and an unobserved component:
MTEðx, uD Þ 5 E ðY1 2 Y0 jX 5 x, UD 5 uD Þ
5 x ðb1 2 b0 Þ 1 E ðU1 2 U0 jUD 5 uD Þ:
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
observed component

(3)

unobserved component

Accordingly, the treatment effect heterogeneity resulting from the observed characteristics X affects the intercept of the MTE curve as a function of uD, but its slope in uD does not depend on X. This separability is a
common feature of empirical MTE applications because it considerably
eases the data requirements for estimating the MTE curve.16 Most importantly, it allows identifying the MTE over the unconditional support of
P(Z ), jointly generated by the excluded instrument and the covariates,
as opposed to the support of P(Z) conditional on X 5 x (Carneiro et al.
2011).
B. Estimation
We estimate the MTE using the local IV stimator, exploiting the fact that
the model described in Section II.A produces the following outcome
equation as a function of the observed regressors X and the propensity
16
The existing literature typically invokes the stronger assumption of full independence
between (X, R, T, Z~ ), and (U0, U1, UD) (e.g., Aakvik et al. 2005; Carneiro et al. 2011, 2017).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2366

journal of political economy

score P ðZ Þ 5 E½D 5 1jZ  (cf. Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil 2006; Carneiro et al. 2011):
E ½Y jX 5 x, R 5 r , T 5 t, P ðZ Þ 5 p 
5 X b0 1 Ra 1 T t 1 X ðb1 2 b0 Þp 1 K ðp Þ,
where K(p) is a nonlinear function of the propensity score. As shown by
Heckman et al. (2006) and Carneiro et al. (2011), the derivative of this
outcome equation with respect to p delivers the MTE for X 5 x and
UD 5 p:17
∂E ½Y jX 5 x, P ðZ Þ 5 p 
∂K ðp Þ
5 X ðb 1 2 b 0 Þ 1
∂p
∂p
5 MTEðX 5 x, UD 5 p Þ:
We implement this approach by first estimating the treatment selection
equation in (2) as a probit model to obtain estimates of the propensity
^d Þ and then modeling K(p) as a polynomial in p of degree
score p^ 5 FðZ b
k and estimating the outcome equation:
K

Y 5 X b0 1 Ra 1 T t 1 X ðb1 2 b0 Þp^ 1 oak p^k 1 ε:

(4)

k52

The MTE curve is then the derivative of equation (4) with respect to p^.
We assume a second-order polynomial in p^ (K 5 2) in our baseline specification but generally find similar results for K 5 3, K 5 4, and a
semiparametric specification of K(p). To assess whether treatment effects vary with the unobserved resistance to treatment, we run tests for
the joint significance of the second- and higher-order terms of the polynomial (i.e., the ak in eq. [4]).18
The MTE can be aggregated over UD in different ways to generate several meaningful mean treatment parameters, such as the effect of treatment on the treated (see Heckman and Vytlacil 2005, 2007). In this paper, we compute the unconditional treatment effects by aggregating the
17
The derivative of the outcome with respect to the observed inducement into treatment (the propensity score) yields the treatment effect for individuals at a given point
in the distribution of the unobserved resistance to treatment (UD) because of the following.
First, given a propensity score with the specific value of p 5 p 0 , individuals with UD < p 0 are
treated while individuals with UD 5 p 0 are indifferent. If p is increased from p 0 by a small
amount dp, previously indifferent individuals with UD 5 p 0 are shifted into treatment with
a marginal treatment effect of MTEðUD 5 p 0 Þ. Outcome Y then increases by the share of
shifted individuals times their treatment effect, dY 5 dp  MTEðUD 5 p 0 Þ, and the derivative of Y with respect to dp normalizes dY by dp (the change in the explanatory variable),
dY =dp 5 MTEðUD 5 p 0 Þ. The derivative of the outcome with respect to the propensity
score thus yields the MTE at UD 5 p.
18
We estimate the model using our own modified and extended version of the Stata
margte command (see Brave and Walstrum 2014).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2367

MTE in equation (3) not only over UD but also over the appropriate distributions of the covariates (see Cornelissen et al. [2016] for a description of the weights). We report bootstrapped standard errors throughout with clustering at the municipality level.
III. Data
Our main data source is a set of 1994–2006 administrative records for
one large region in West Germany, the Weser-Ems region in Lower Saxony.19 These records, which represent an unusually wide array of results
for the school readiness examination administered by licensed pediatricians, cover the full population of school entry–aged children. We combine these data with data on the local supply of child care slots obtained
from our own survey, as well as with data on sociodemographic municipality characteristics and local child care quality measures, both computed from social security records. This combination of different data
sources produced an extremely rich, high-quality data set that is unavailable for other countries.
A.

School Entrance Examination

A unique feature of the German school system is that in the year before
entering elementary school, all children undergo a compulsory school
entry examination designed to assess their school readiness and identify
any developmental delays or health problems needing preventive treatment in the future. Typically administered in a nearby elementary school
in the child’s municipality between the February and June before August
school entry, the 45-minute test, conducted by government pediatricians, includes an interview with the child, as well as a battery of tests
of motor skills and physical development. Hence, a major important advantage of our outcomes is that they represent standardized assessments
by health professionals rather than subjective assessments by parents,
which may be prone to a number of sources of bias.20
Our main variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the pediatrician assesses the child as ready for school entry in the fall. Because the
pediatricians base such recommendations on all school entry tests and
general observations of the child during the examination, this outcome
serves as a summary measure of all readiness assessments. According to
official guidelines, delayed school entry is recommended in the case of
19
The region is mostly rural, and the two largest cities are home to 270,000 and 160,000
inhabitants, respectively.
20
Baker et al. (2008) and Heckman and Kautz (2014) provide a detailed discussion on
this issue, and Sandner and Jungmann (2016) show that bias in maternal ratings of early
child development is related to socioeconomic status.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2368

journal of political economy

major physical, cognitive, or emotional developmental delays and if any
therapeutic or special-needs measures will not generate school readiness
before the start of school. Similar indicators used to assess school preparedness in the United States have proven to be important predictors for later
academic success (e.g., Duncan et al. 2007; Grissmer et al. 2010; Pagani
et al. 2010). Since parents and schools almost always comply with the pediatrician’s recommendation, deferment from school entry also leads to significant earnings losses later in life through delayed entry into the labor
market.21 For example, Dustmann, Puhani, and Schönberg (2017) show
that in Germany, delayed school entry by 1 year leads to 2.3 percent lower
earnings between 30 and 45. Likewise, our own calculations based on the
earnings profiles of all men born between 1961 and 1964, discounted to
age 3 using a discount factor of 0.97, suggest that delayed school entry lowers lifetime earnings by €16,878 ($22,397) in 2010 prices.22
In addition to our central measure of school readiness, we investigate
further more specific examination outcomes: a diagnosis of motor skill
problems (based on balancing, jumping, and ball exercise tests for body
coordination);23 the logarithm of the child’s body mass index (BMI) and
a binary indicator for overweight, as two important predictors of adult
health (Ebbeling, Pawlak, and Ludwig 2002; Wang et al. 2011); and a physician recommendation for compensatory sport when the child shows any
postural or coordination problems, lack of muscular tension, overweight
caused by a lack of physical exercise, or psychosomatic developmental
problems. For child overweight, we follow the official German pediatric
guidelines of a BMI above the 90th percentile of the age- and genderspecific BMI distribution (see Kromeyer-Hauschild et al. 2001). Our data
also include the number of years a child has spent in public child care (information rarely available in administrative data sources) but contain parental background information (e.g., education) only from 2001 onward.
Therefore, we exploit the latter only in an auxiliary analysis.
From this data set, we sample all children examined for the first time
between 1994 and 2002, which are the school entry cohorts most affected

21
In 2005, the actual deferment rate in our region was nearly identical to the deferment
rate recommended by the pediatrician (author calculations based on data from the Lower
Saxony State Office for Statistics [2005]).
22
Available evidence from the United States and Norway is broadly consistent with the
findings for Germany. For example, Deming and Dynarski (2008) conclude that “there is
substantial evidence that entering school later . . . depresses lifetime earnings (by delaying
entry into the labor market)” (72–73). Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2011) examine the
effect of school starting age for Norway and show that delaying school entry leads to lower
earnings until about age 30.
23
In our data, motor skill problems take four values depending on the severity of the
abnormality. As very severe levels are a rare outcome and the multivalued outcome variable
lacks a meaningful cardinal scale (see Cunha and Heckman 2008), we have transformed
them into binary outcome variables.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2369

by the child care program expansion (see Sec. IV.B). We further restrict
the sample to municipalities for which we have data on available child
care slots (see Sec. III.B below), which yields a baseline sample of
135,906 children in 80 municipalities. As table 1, panel A, shows, 51 percent of the children in this final sample attended child care for at least
3 years (our baseline treatment variable).24 Children of immigrant ancestry make up about 12 percent of our sample. Although 91 percent of all
the children examined were assessed as ready for immediate school entry,
considerable individual heterogeneity is observable in this measure: on
the basis of a probit regression using the same covariates as in our baseline specification, predicted school readiness ranges from 0.31 to 1 and is
less than 0.79 for 10 percent of children. It should be noted that these
numbers capture individual heterogeneity in school readiness based
on observed characteristics only: individual heterogeneity based on unobserved characteristics is likely to be even larger. Regarding the other
outcomes, 85 percent of the children showed no lack of motor skills,
82 percent had no need for compensatory sport, and only 8 percent of
the children could be classified as overweight.
We provide additional information on minority children in panel B of
table 1. Thirty-five percent of minority children are ethnic Germans
from the former Soviet Union whose parents arrived in Germany mostly
in the early 1990s after the breakdown of the Eastern European communist regimes. Children of Turkish descent form the second-largest minority group, making up roughly 30 percent of minority children in
our sample. While both minority groups come from less educated family
backgrounds than German children, children of Turkish origin are
more disadvantaged and are less likely to speak German at home with
at least one family member than children from the former Soviet Union,
even though the Turkish arrived in Germany predominantly in the 1960s
and 1970s.25
B. Data on Child Care Slots
We supplement the school entrance examination data with information
on the number of child care slots available in each year and municipality,
collected individually from regional youth welfare offices for lack of a
central source. For the handful of municipalities that could not provide
us with such information, we successfully contacted all child care centers
in the municipality via email and telephone interviews. Overall, we were
24
Only 5.6 percent of the children in our sample attended child care for longer than
3 years, so the vast majority (88 percent) of treated children attended child care for 3 years.
25
See Casey and Dustmann (2008) for additional evidence on language usage of minority groups in Germany.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

TABLE 1
Descriptive Statistics
Variable
A. Individual characteristics:
Treatment variable:
Child care attendance for at least 3 years
Selected covariates:
Minority
Female
Age at examination in months
Outcomes:
School readiness
Predicted school readiness:
Minimum
5th percentile
10th percentile
25th percentile
50th percentile
75th percentile
90th percentile
Motor skills
No compensatory sport required
BMI
Overweight (BMI > 90th percentile)
B. Characteristics of minority/majority groups:
Mother has no postsecondary education:
Majority (German origin)
Former Soviet Union (35% of minority children)
Turkish (31% of minority children)
Mother has college degree:
Majority (German origin)
Former Soviet Union
Turkish
German spoken with at least one family member (Family Survey):
Former Soviet Union
Turkish
C. Child care quality indicators:
Child-to-staff ratio (median)
Share of high educated among staff
Share of male staff

Estimate

.51
.12
.49
74.68
.91
.31
.74
.79
.87
.93
.97
.98
.85
.82
15.61
.08
.07
.28
.57
.37
.34
.15
.44
.38
9.44
.09
.02

Source.—Authors’ calculation based on the following data sets. Panel A: School entry
examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002. Panel B: School entry examinations, Weser-Ems,
2001–3, and information of German spoken with at least one family member (father, mother,
or grandparents) from the Special Survey on Russian and Turkish children for Children Longitudinal Study from the German Youth Institute (DJI), Munich, 2003. The sample refers to 8and 9-year-old children of the former Soviet Union (N 5 262) and of Turkish origin (N 5 256)
in 2003. Panel C: Social security records, Weser-Ems, 1990–98, 18–65-year-olds.
Note.—Panel A reports sample means of early child care attendance (our treatment variable), of selected child characteristics, and of child outcomes in our sample. Panel B compares sample means of maternal education between majority children and children of
Turkish origin and from the Soviet Union. In addition, it reports the share of children
of Turkish origin and from the Soviet Union origin who speak primarily German with at
least one family member, based on data from the Children Longitudinal Survey. Panel C
displays sample means of child care quality indicators at the municipality level, referring
to when the child was 3 years old.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2371

able to gather detailed information on child care provision during 1990–
2003 for 81 of the 118 municipalities in our data set, encompassing around
77 percent of all the children examined.
C. Sociodemographic Municipality Characteristics
and Local Child Care Quality
We also supplement the examination information with yearly data on local sociodemographic and child care quality characteristics measured at
the municipality level. Municipality characteristics include the number of
inhabitants, median wage, and the share of individuals with medium and
tertiary education in the workforce, as well as the share of immigrants
and women in the workforce obtained either from the statistical office
of Lower Saxony or computed from social security records on all men
and women covered by the social security system in the region. Local
child care quality indicators are derived from social security records on
all child care teachers employed in the region with a focus on two characteristics identified as central to child care program success (cf. Walters
2015): class size and teacher education (see, e.g., Chetty et al. 2011). We
also consider the presence of male child care teachers, which is allowed
to affect outcomes differently by gender. The summary characteristics of
the child care quality measures, reported in table 1, panel C, reveal a median child-to-staff ratio of 9.4, an average share of 9 percent of child care
teachers with a university degree, and a male staff share of 2 percent.26
IV.
A.

Background
Child Care Provision in Germany

To facilitate interpretation of our findings, we first briefly outline the
main elements of formal child care provision for 3–6-year-olds in Germany,
which is almost exclusively public. As in other countries, the German universal child care program is a half-day program with strict nationwide quality standards: the student-teacher ratio must not exceed 25 children per
two teachers and teachers must have completed at least a 2-year statecertified vocational program followed by a 1-year internship as a child care
teacher. Other regulations govern the space provided for each child and
learning goals pursued by the centers. Overall, these standards lead to a relatively homogeneous child care environment compared to, for example,
the United States.
26
Child care teachers in Germany mostly have a vocational degree, which is equivalent
to a community college degree in the United States. University degrees among child care
workers are less common, so the 9 percent of staff with a university degree are likely to be
center managers.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2372

journal of political economy

In terms of quality standards, Germany occupies an intermediate position in the international context: the 12.5∶1 student-teacher ratio lies between the 8∶1 ratio for 3–7-year-olds in UK center-based programs, the
maximum ratio of 10∶1 in the US Head Start program, and the 25∶1 ratio
in French programs (OECD 2006). As of 2002, the estimated annual expenditure per child in Germany was $4,998, comparable to that of other
continental European universal child care programs (e.g., $4,512 in
France, $4,923 in the Netherlands) but well below high-quality intensive
programs like Head Start, which invests about $7,200 per child (OECD
2005, 2006).
As in most universal child care programs, the majority of children in
Germany (over 90 percent) attend child care part-time for 4 hours in
the morning.27 Most children start child care in August with the start of
the new “preschool year,” and once enrolled, nearly all children remain
in child care until school entry at the age of 6. As is typical for the age
group considered, learning is mostly informal and play oriented and is
carried out in the context of day-to-day social interactions between children and teachers. Like the US HighScope (Ypsilanti, Michigan) program
or UK Early Years Foundation Stage (see Samuelsson, Sheridan, and Williams [2006] and the Department for Education [2014] for descriptions),
the programs emphasize as their main learning goals personal and emotional development, social skills, the development of cognitive abilities
and positive attitudes toward learning, physical development, creative development, and language and communication skills. An important additional
element of German formal child care (and similar programs) is communication with parents to inform them about their children’s developmental
and learning progress and provide them with educational guidance.
B. The Child Care Expansion Policy
In Germany, child care for children aged 3–6 is heavily subsidized, with
parental fees covering, on average, only about 10 percent of the overall
child care costs and the remainder shared by the municipality and state
government. Until the early 1990s, however, legal definitions of how the
state and local municipalities should share child care provision responsibilities were vague and subsidies for the creation of formal child care slots
were limited. As a result, such slots were severely rationed and existing
slots were always filled. Waiting lists existed at all child care centers and
were long. At this time, open slots were primarily allocated according
to the child’s age—so 3-year-olds were the most affected by the ration27
This calculation is based on data from the Statistical Report on Child Care Institutions
from the Lower Saxony State Office for Statistics (2004, 19).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2373

ing—and the mother’s labor force status, with children of working mothers given priority over children of nonworking mothers. If two children
were of the same age and their mothers were both working, the application date and time on the waiting lists were the decisive factors. Then, in
August 1992, after the burden imposed on families by low child care availability had dominated the political discussion for well over a year, the federal government introduced a legal mandate that by January 1, 1996, every child would be guaranteed a subsidized 4-hour slot from the third
birthday until school entry. Although slot provision would be the responsibility of the residential municipality, the state would provide generous
financial aid for the construction and running of child care facilities. Municipalities with relatively lower child care coverage rates would be eligible for the highest subsidies. Despite these subsidies, however, creating
child care slots imposed too many constraints on municipalities, so the
introduction of the legal mandate by January 1, 1996, was no longer considered feasible. Consequently, the state government of Lower Saxony allowed exceptions until December 31, 1998.
Overall, between 1992 and 2002, around 11,000 new child care slots
were created for children aged 3–6 in the 80 municipalities in our sample
(an increase of close to 40 percent). Part A of figure 1 depicts a box plot of
the evolution of the child care coverage rate, computed as the number of
available child care slots in a municipality 3 years prior to the school entry
examination (i.e., when the child was approximately aged 3), divided by
the number of 3–6-year-old children living in that municipality at that
time. Average coverage across municipalities increases strongly from
0.59 slot per eligible child in the 1994 examination cohort to just over
0.8 slot for those in the 2002 examination cohort. The box plot also shows
that there is a substantial range of cross-sectional variation in the coverage rate of around 30–40 percentage points around the annual means.
Across all years, the overall coverage rate ranges from below 40 percent
at the start of the expansion to close to 100 percent at the end of the expansion period. Part B of figure 1 plots the proportion of children who
attended child care for 1, 2, or (at least) 3 years for the 1994–2002 examination cohorts. The figure reveals that the expansion in child care slots
mostly increased the 3-year attendance rate (i.e., enrollment at age 3)
and reduced the 2-year attendance rate (i.e., enrollment at age 4)—as
we would expect since prior to the expansion preference was given to
older children when demand was excessive. Among children in the 1994
examination cohort (who would have entered child care at the earliest in
1991 before child care expansion), around 41 percent attended for the
full 3 years. For children examined in 2002, who benefited fully from
the child care extension, the 3-year attendance rate rose to 67 percent,
an increase of nearly 63 percent compared to 1994. This observation

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

F IG . 1.—Evolution of child care coverage and child care attendance. Part A, Child care
coverage rate. Part B, Distribution of years of child care attendance by cohort. Part A shows
the evolution of the child care coverage rate (our instrument) computed as the number of
available child care slots in a municipality 3 years prior to the school entry examination
(i.e., at approximately age 3 of the child), divided by the number of 3–6-year-old children
living in that municipality at that time. The figure shows the annual mean (connected
line), median (horizontal bar), 25th and 75th percentiles (edges of the boxes), as well
as 5th and 95th percentiles (whiskers), all computed at the individual child level (populationweighted). Part B shows the accompanying changes in the distribution of the years of child
care attendance by cohort. Source: Child care coverage rate: Own calculations based on data
on child care slot availability by year and municipality obtained from own data survey and
number of 3–6-year-olds living in the municipality provided by Statistical Office of Lower Saxony. Attendance rates: School entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2375

motivates our decision to define treatment in our baseline specification
as attending child care for 3 years (or “attending child care early”).
Although the expansion in child care slots primarily shifted children
from attending child care for 2 years to attending child care for 3 years,
part B also reveals a drop in the share attending for 1 year, from 15 percent for the 1994 examination cohort to 6 percent for the 2002 examination cohort. Therefore, the expansion also induced some children
to attend child care for 2 (or more) years rather than 1 year only.28 In
Section V.F, we explicitly take into account the multivalued nature of
our treatment and distinguish between attending child care for 1, 2,
or 3 years.
C. Exogeneity of the Child Care Expansion
Because the child care expansion was staggered across time and municipalities, in the empirical analysis we are able to exploit sharp shifts in
the supply within municipalities across nearby cohorts. Specifically, we
use the child care coverage rate in t 2 3 (3 years before the school entry
exam at approximately age 3 when parents decide to enroll their child in
early child care) as an instrument for early child care attendance conditional on municipality and cohort dummies, thereby accounting for
time-constant differences across municipalities (such as residential sorting). This identification strategy is tighter than typically adopted in the
MTE literature on returns to schooling, which mainly employs spatial
variation in instruments.
For the instrument to be valid, the timing and intensity of the child
care expansion must be as good as random (cf. the second assumption
discussed in Sec. II.A). In column 1 of table 2, we obtain an initial picture
of which municipalities in our sample experienced an above-average
1994–2002 expansion in child care slots by regressing the change in
child care coverage between 1991 and 1999 (i.e., from our 1994 [oldest]
cohort’s child care attendance in t 2 3 to our 2002 [youngest] cohort’s
attendance) on the initial coverage rate in 1991. As expected, the change
in child care supply is strongly negatively related to its baseline availability,
reflecting both the higher state subsidies received by municipalities with
lower initial coverage rates and the greater political pressure they felt to
expand availability relative to municipalities with higher initial coverage
rates. Then, in column 2, we add a number of baseline (1990) municipality characteristics, including the median wage and the shares of medium
and highly skilled individuals in the workforce. Reassuringly, only one of
these baseline characteristics helps to predict the size of the child care ex28
The nonattendance rate, in contrast, remained roughly constant, suggesting that the
expansion did not shift children into child care who previously had not attended at all.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2376

journal of political economy
TABLE 2
Determinants of the Child Care Expansion

Initial coverage rate

(1)

(2)

2.437**
(.175)

2.478**
(.190)
.000
(.002)
.010
(.011)
.003
(.003)
.0001
(.000)
.014**
(.007)
2.0002
(.002)
.202***
(.026)
.1855

Median wage level
Share of high educated
Share of medium educated
Number of inhabitants (in 1,000s)
Share of immigrants in workforce
Share of women in workforce
Constant
p-value for joint significance of other covariates
(excluding initial coverage rate)

.172***
(.016)

Source.—Child care coverage rate: Own calculations based on (a) data on child care
slot availability by year and municipality obtained from own data survey and (b) number
of 3–6-year-olds living in the municipality provided by Statistical Office of Lower Saxony.
Median wage, educational shares, share of immigrants, and women in workforce: Social security records, Weser-Ems, 1990–98, 18–65-year-olds. Number of inhabitants: Statistical Office of Lower Saxony.
Note.—The table investigates the determinants of the expansion in child care slots in
the municipality, by regressing the change in the child care coverage rate in the municipality between examination cohorts 1994 and 2001 on the initial coverage rate for the 1994
cohort (col. 1) and baseline municipality characteristics (col. 2). The child care coverage
rate is measured 3 years prior to the school entry examination (i.e., when the cohort is approximately aged 3). In municipalities where information for 1994 or 2001 was missing, we
use the adjacent cohort. The last row reports the p-value for the hypothesis that municipality characteristics at the baseline are jointly equal to zero. All coefficients on shares refer to
1 percentage point changes in these shares. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the
municipality level are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

pansion in the municipality (and jointly they are insignificant). Further,
the initial coverage rate remains strongly correlated with the expansion
intensity. However, even if the municipality characteristics at baseline
did predict child care expansion in the municipality, it would not generally invalidate our identification strategy because these characteristics at
baseline mostly reflect time-constant differences, which are accounted
for by the inclusion of municipality dummies in our estimation.
In addition to exploiting across-municipality variation in expansion intensity, we also investigate whether the timing of the creation of child care
slots is quasi-random. To do so, we regress the child care coverage rates
per 3–6-year-old in t 2 3, our instrument, on sociodemographic munici-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2377

pality characteristics measured in t 2 4 (i.e., 1 year prior to the measurement of child care availability, to account for the fact that the effect of
socioeconomic characteristics on the expansion is unlikely to be instantaneous) while conditioning on municipality and cohort dummies. As
table 3 shows, none of the municipality characteristics is statistically significant, and changes in the municipality’s socioeconomic characteristics appear to be uncorrelated with changes in the child care supply. Hence, the
TABLE 3
Balancing Tests
Variable

Estimate

Age

2.00001
(.0001)
.00000
(.0020)
2.0003
(.0002)
2.00003
(.0005)
.002
(.001)
.009
(.011)
2.002
(.002)
.000
(.003)
.003
(.006)
.004
(.003)
Yes
Yes
.254

Age squared
Female
Minority child
Median wage level
Share of high educated
Share of medium educated
Number of inhabitants (in 1,000s)
Share of immigrants in workforce
Share of women working
Municipality dummies
Cohort dummies
p-value for joint significance of covariates

Source.—Child care coverage rate: Own calculations based
on (a) data on child care slot availability by year and municipality obtained from own data survey and (b) number of 3–6-yearolds living in the municipality provided by Statistical Office of
Lower Saxony. Individual characteristics: School entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002. Median wage, educational shares,
share of immigrants, and women in workforce: Social security
records, Weser-Ems, 1990–98, 18–65-year-olds. Number of inhabitants: Statistical Office of Lower Saxony.
Note.—The table reports coefficients from regressions of the
instrument (the child care coverage rate) on individual and
municipality-level covariates measured in the previous period,
conditional on municipality and cohort dummies. The child care
coverage rate is measured 3 years prior to the school entry examination (i.e., when the cohort is approximately aged 3). The last
row reports the p-value for the hypothesis that the covariates are
jointly equal to zero. All coefficients on shares refer to 1 percentage point changes in these shares. Bootstrapped standard errors
clustered at the municipality level are reported in parentheses.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2378

journal of political economy

results in both table 2 and table 3 support our identifying assumption that
both the intensity and timing of new child care slot creation are plausibly
exogenous. Nevertheless, as a robustness check, we also report results from
a specification that exploits solely variation across municipalities in the intensity, but not the timing, of child care slot creation (see Sec. V.E).
Another threat to identification is the possibility that child care expansion could crowd out other public expenditure or reduce household income, which might negatively affect child outcomes. Two factors limit
this concern: because income taxes are set at the federal level, municipalities could not increase them to finance the increased child care expenditure; and because social and unemployment benefits are regulated at
the federal level, they are independent of local government finances.
An additional threat is that child care expansion might negatively change
child care quality, affecting not only children pulled into child care by the
creation of new slots but also those whose child care attendance is unaffected. To assess this possibility, in our baseline specification, we condition on the child care quality measures available in our data, including
child-teacher ratio, teacher education, and teacher gender. We find that
excluding the child care quality measures has little effect on our results
(see Sec. V.E). A final threat is endogenous mobility: families with strong
preferences for early child care attendance may move to municipalities
with a larger supply of child care. In our sample, however, this bias is unlikely to be a concern, not only because only 4.4 percent of the families
moved to a new municipality in the 2 years prior to the examination
but also because the mobility rate is uncorrelated with changes in municipal child care availability.29
V. Results
A.

First-Stage Selection Equation

We display the parameter estimates for the first-stage probit selection
equation (2) in column 1 of table 4.30 To allow for the possibility that at
29
Regressing the share of families that moved to a new municipality during the previous
2 years on the number of available child care slots as measured by the coverage rate (our
instrument) yields a small and statistically insignificant coefficient. Specifically, the point
estimate suggests that a 10 percent increase in the coverage rate decreases the mobility rate
by 0.4 percent (standard error 0.29 percent), providing no evidence of selective migration
based on child care availability. Results when using changes in the number of 0–3-year-old
children in t 2 3 as an alternative dependent variable are very similar.
30
We additionally control for a quadratic in age at examination; dummies for year, municipality, and birth month; time-variant municipality characteristics (median wage, educational shares, number of inhabitants, share of immigrants, share of women in the workforce) in t 2 4; and child care quality indicators (above-median child-to-staff ratio, share
of university graduates among child care staff, male staff share interacted with child gender) in t 2 3.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2379

high levels of coverage, when excess demand eases, the likelihood of filling an additional slot may decrease, we use as instruments not only the
child care coverage rate (centered around its mean) in the municipality
3 years prior to the examination but also its square. We further interact
our instruments with individual child care characteristics (minority status, gender, and age) to allow for the possibility that the expansion primarily draws in children of a particular observed type. Our results remain
largely unchanged when we do not interact our instruments with individual characteristics or use only the coverage rate in the municipality, but
not its square, as an instrument (see cols. 2 and 3 of table 5 and Sec. V.E).
To ease interpretation, we report in the table marginal effects only for
the noninteracted terms of the coverage rate (referring to a German boy
of average age), and we illustrate the effects of the interaction terms by
plotting the predicted probability of selection into early child care (i.e.,
the propensity score) as a function of the child care coverage rate by minority status and gender in figure 2. The child care coverage rate is a
strong predictor of early child care attendance, and as expected, the coefficients on the linear and squared terms of the instrument reveal a concave relation between the child care supply at the time the child care decision was made and the decision to enroll early.31
The heterogeneity in the first stage by gender and minority status depicted
in figure 2 shows that differences by gender are comparatively small, with
girls having a slightly higher propensity to attend child care early but few
noticeable gender differences in the slope of the curve. There are, however,
strong differences by minority status. At all levels of the coverage rate, minority children have a 20–30 percentage point lower propensity for early
child care attendance. Moreover, at lower values of the coverage rate, the
curve for minority children has a steeper slope, implying that the expansion of available child care initially shifted minority children into child care
more strongly than it did majority children. In contrast, at higher values of
31
Since the coverage rate used in table 4 is centered around its mean, the coefficients
of the quadratic in the coverage rate in col. 1 of table 4 suggest a turning point at 0.75
(0:331=ð2  0:22Þ) above the mean of the coverage rate of 0.68. The turning point after
which additional child care slots shift children out of early child care therefore occurs at
1.43 (0.75 1 0.68), which is out of the support of the coverage rate in our sample. It should
further be noted that the concave shape of P(Z ) in Z does not violate the monotonicity (or,
more appropriately, as suggested by Heckman et al. [2006], uniformity) assumption. The
IV uniformity assumption requires that for a given pair of values z and z0 of the instrument,
the effect on the treatment probability of changing the instrument from z to z0 has the same
sign for all individuals whose participation decision is affected by that change. It is thus a
condition across individuals at fixed pairs of values of the instrument, and not an assumption on the functional form of P(Z ) in Z across values of Z. We find little evidence to suggest
that the expansion has shifted individuals out of the treatment to any important extent.
When predicting the marginal effect of Z on P(Z ) at the individual covariate values of each
individual in the sample, marginal effects are negative only for 1.6 percent of individuals in
the sample.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2380

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Minority  propensity score

Female  propensity score

Propensity score squared

Propensity score

Other minorities

Ethnic Germans (former Soviet Union)

Turkish

Minority

Female

Child care coverage rate squared

Child care coverage rate

.331***
(.043)
2.220**
(.108)
.014***
(.003)
2.198***
(.011)

Selection Equation
Child Care ≥ 3 Years
(1)

2.135
(.115)
.215**
(.099)
2.086***
(.014)
.117***
(.035)

.092***
(.009)
2.120***
(.020)

Outcome Equation
School Readiness
(2)

2.207***
(.019)
2.213***
(.015)
2.178***
(.010)

.331***
(.042)
2.220**
(.108)
.014***
(.003)

Selection Equation
Child Care ≥ 3 Years
(3)

TABLE 4
Selection Equation and School Readiness Outcome Equation

2.199***
(.031)
2.073***
(.024)
2.144***
(.028)
2.170
(.131)
.205*
(.105)
2.085***
(.015)

.092***
(.009)

Outcome Equation
School Readiness
(4)

2381

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
135,906

56.83
.0000
.029
135,906

Outcome Equation
School Readiness
(2)

135,906

72.71
.0000

Selection Equation
Child Care ≥ 3 Years
(3)

.051
135,906

.063
(.043)
.143***
(.041)

.201***
(.065)

Outcome Equation
School Readiness
(4)

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.
Note.—Columns 1 and 3 report average marginal effects from probit selection models in which the dependent variable is equal to one if the child attends
public child care for at least 3 years (“first stage”). The child care coverage rate (our instrument) is measured relative to its overall mean. The instrument in the
probit selection equation is interacted with individual characteristics (age, gender, ethnic minority status); interaction terms are not shown to save space, but
the heterogeneous effect by minority status and gender is depicted in fig. 2. The coefficients on the child care coverage rate refer to a German boy of average
age. Columns 2 and 4 display estimates from the outcome equation (see eq. [4] in the text), where the dependent variable is an indicator variable for school
readiness. Coefficients of regressors not interacted with the propensity score measure effects on the outcome in the untreated state (i.e., b0 in eq. [4]), whereas
coefficients of regressors interacted with the propensity score measure the difference of the effects between the treated and the untreated state (b1 2 b0 in
eq. [4]). In cols. 3 and 4 we further allow the effects of early child care attendance to differ between the two main minority groups in our sample: children
of Turkish descent and children from the former Soviet Union. Further included controls not displayed in the table are age and age squared and time-varying
municipality sociodemographic characteristics in t 2 4 as well as child care quality indicators in t 2 3, each interacted with the propensity score, as well as cohort
dummies, municipality dummies, and birth month dummies (not interacted with the propensity score). Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the municipality level are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

x2 for test of excluded instruments
p-value for test of excluded instruments
p-value for test of heterogeneity
Observations

Other minority  propensity score

Ethnic Germans (former Soviet Union) 
propensity score

Turkish  propensity score

Selection Equation
Child Care ≥ 3 Years
(1)

TABLE 4 (CONTINUED)

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
.050
(.069)
2.070
(.085)
.176**
(.083)
.031
135,906

.045
(.072)
2.071
(.092)
.165**
(.082)
.054
135,906

.035
(.031)
2.066
(.048)
.140***
(.046)
.017
135,906

.130
(.105)
.008
(.109)
.251**
(.120)
.028
146,522

2.005
(.084)
2.152
(.118)
.160
(.113)
.074
56,942

.114
(.092)
2.020
(.128)
.219**
(.106)
.119
66,865

Birth
Months
Jan.–June
(7)

.048
.073
(.073) (.072)
2.053
2.072
(.084) (.082)
.154*
.223***
(.093) (.082)
.092
.008
135,906 135,906

No
Age
Quality
Dummies Controls
(8)
(9)

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.
Note.—The table reports, for our main outcome variable of school readiness, the average treatment effect (ATE), the treatment effect on the treated (TT),
the treatment effect on the untreated (TUT), and the p-value for a test of essential heterogeneity for various alternative specifications. Column 1 refers to the
baseline regression from col. 2 in table 4. In col. 2, the instrument is not interacted with covariates in the selection equation, and in col. 3 the instrument is not
interacted and the quadratic term of the instrument is dropped. In col. 4, the first stage is estimated semiparametrically. This is done by creating 14 dummies to
indicate 5 percentage point bins of the instrument and 20 dummies indicating 5 percentile bins of a linear index in the covariates and regressing the treatment
indicator on the full set of interactions among all of these dummies. In col. 5, the instrument is the initial child care coverage rate (for the oldest cohort in our
data) interacted with cohort dummies (and gender, minority status, and age, as in our baseline specification). Column 6 exploits only variation across municipalities in the intensity of the child care expansion and restricts the analysis to the (pooled) oldest and youngest examination cohorts, 1994/95 vs. 2001/2. In
col. 7, the sample is restricted to children born in the first half of the calendar year, and in col. 8, monthly age dummies instead of a quadratic in age are included as controls. In col. 9, child care quality controls are not included in the regressions. The reported p -value for a test of heterogeneity is a test for a nonzero
slope of the MTE curve (see also Sec. II.B). Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the municipality level are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

.059
(.072)
TT
2.051
(.080)
TUT
.173**
(.085)
p-value of test for essential heterogeneity .029
Observations
135,906

ATE

Initial
Noninteracted, Semiparametric Coverage
Long
Baseline Noninteracted
Linear
First Stage
Rate IV Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

TABLE 5
Robustness Checks

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2383

F IG . 2.—Propensity score P(Z ) as a function of the child care coverage rate (Z ) by gender and minority status. The graph displays, using the same specification as in column 1 of
table 4, the propensity score predicted from a probit regression as a function of the child
care coverage rate (Z ) by minority status and gender, holding all other control variables at
mean values. Source: Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, WeserEms, 1994–2002, as the main data source.

the coverage rate, additional increases in child care slots have no effect on
minority children, although they still have a moderate effect on majority
children.
The first stage generates a large common support for the propensity
score P(Z ), which ranges from 0.01 to 0.96 (fig. 3).32 The figure shows
the unconditional support jointly generated by variation of both the instruments and the covariates, which is sufficient to identify the MTE under the assumption commonly made in MTE applications that the shape
of the MTE curve does not vary with covariates (see eq. [3]). Consider
figure 2 for an illustration. The figure shows that the instrument alone
induces variation in the propensity score P(Z ) between 0.35 and 0.65
for majority children and between 0.1 and 0.35 for minority children.
Therefore, the joint variation of minority status and of the instrument
can alone account for variation in P(Z ) between 0.1 and 0.65. The remaining support (up to the full range from 0.01 to 0.96) is generated
by additional joint variation of the instrument and the other covariates.
32
The large common support is not due to using the coverage rate squared as an additional instrument, nor is it driven by the interactions with our instruments and the covariates. The unconditional support does not change when only the coverage rate is used as
an instrument; see fig. A1 in app. A.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2384

journal of political economy

F IG . 3.—Common support. The figure plots the frequency distribution of the propensity score by treatment status. The propensity score is predicted from the baseline firststage regression in column 1 of table 4. Source: Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.

B. Treatment Effect Heterogeneity in Observed
Child Characteristics
In column 2 of table 4, we report estimates, based on equation (4), for
the effects of early child care attendance on our main outcome of school
readiness. The results point to an equalizing effect of early child care attendance on the outcomes of children with different observed characteristics. Most important, in the untreated state, minority children are
about 12 percentage points less likely than majority children to be assessed as ready for immediate school entry (see the coefficient on minority, which refers to b0 in eq. [4]). At the same time, their treatment effect
is about 12 percentage points higher than that of majority students (see
the minority  propensity score coefficient, which refers to b1 2 b0 in
eq. [4]). This latter observation implies that attending child care early
helps minority children to catch up fully with majority children in terms
of school readiness. A similar pattern emerges with respect to gender.
When attending child care for fewer than 3 years, boys are less likely than
girls to be assessed as ready for school. This disadvantage disappears for
those who attend child care for at least 3 years.
In columns 3 and 4 of table 4, we further allow the effects of early child
care attendance to differ between the two main minority groups in our
sample: children of Turkish descent and children from the former Soviet

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2385

Union. Both minority groups are about 20 percentage points less likely to
attend early child care than majority children (col. 3). In the untreated
state, both minority groups are more disadvantaged in terms of school
readiness than majority children but are fully able to catch up with majority children if they attend child care early. Interestingly, the initial disadvantage and hence the catch-up are larger for children of Turkish origin,
who also come from less educated family backgrounds and are less likely
to speak German at home with a family member than children from the
former Soviet Union (see panel B of table 1).
In sum, the overall results in table 4 show that groups that benefit more
from early child care attendance—that is, boys and particularly minority
children—have a lower propensity to enroll in child care early. This observation points to a pattern of reverse selection on gains in terms of observed characteristics.
C. Marginal Treatment Effects and Summary
Treatment Effect Measures
Part A of figure 4 provides evidence of a similar reverse selection on gains
in terms of unobserved characteristics. The figure shows the MTE curve
described by equation (2) for mean values of X in our sample and relates
the unobserved components of the treatment effect on school readiness,
U1 2 U0 , and the unobserved component of treatment choice, UD. Because higher values of UD imply lower probabilities of treatment, UD can
be interpreted as resistance to enrolling early. The MTE curve increases
with this resistance, mimicking the pattern of reverse selection on gains
found for observed child characteristics. Thus, on the basis of unobserved
characteristics, children who are most likely to enroll in child care early
appear to benefit the least from early child care attendance, a pattern
of heterogeneity (slope of the MTE curve) that is statistically significant
at the 5 percent level (see the p-value for the test of heterogeneity at
the bottom of col. 2 of table 4).
Interestingly, for the 40 percent of children who are most likely to attend child care for 3 years or more (UD < 0:4), the returns to child care
in terms of school readiness are negative albeit not statistically significant
(see fig. 4, part A). In contrast, children with a higher resistance to enrolling in child care early show returns that are not only positive but statistically significant for the 30 percent of children with the highest resistance
to treatment (UD > 0:7).
In column 1 of table 5, on the basis of the same specification as used in
figure 4, part A, we derive the standard treatment parameters ATE (average treatment effect), TT (effect of treatment on the treated), and TUT
(effect of treatment on the untreated) by appropriately aggregating over
the MTE curve. The ATE of 0.059, computed as an equally weighted aver-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2386

journal of political economy

F IG . 4.—MTE curves for school readiness. Part A: MTE curve at average values of the
covariates. Part B: MTE curves and weights for the treated and untreated. Part C: MTE
curve and weights for individuals shifted by the instrument. Part A depicts the MTE curve
for school readiness based on the specification in columns 1 and 2 in table 4 and evaluated
at mean values of the covariates. The 90 percent confidence interval is based on bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the municipality level. Part B displays the MTE curves
evaluated at covariate means for treated and untreated individuals and the associated
weights to compute the treatment effects on the treated and on the untreated (see sec. 4.4 in
Cornelissen et al. [2016]). Part C plots the MTE curve evaluated at covariate means of those
children who are shifted into early child care in response to changes in the instrument and
the associated weights to compute the IV effect (see app. C in Cornelissen et al. [2016]). The
two horizontal lines refer to the IV (2SLS) effect estimated from our data (dashed line) and
aggregated over the MTE curve (dotted line). Source: Authors’ calculations based on school
entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.

age over the MTE curve in figure 4, part A, evaluated at mean values of X,
implies that for a child picked at random from the population of children,
attending child care early raises the probability of being recommended
for elementary school entrance without delay by 5.9 percentage points.
The estimated parameter is, however, not significantly different from zero.
To compute the TT and TUT, respectively, we aggregate over the MTE
curves evaluated at the X ’s of the treated and untreated (see eq. [28] and
accompanying text in Cornelissen et al. [2016] for a derivation of the
weights). The MTE curve at the X’s of the untreated lies above the
MTE curve at the X’s of the treated (depicted in fig. 4, part B), reflecting
the reverse selection on gains based on observed child characteristics
documented in table 4. The figure also displays the weights applied to
these curves to compute the TT and TUT, respectively. Whereas the

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2387

TT gives most weight to low values of UD (since individuals with low resistance to treatment are more likely to be treated), the TUT gives most
weight to high values of UD (because individuals with high resistance
to treatment are more likely to be untreated).
Our findings for the TT suggest that for the average treated child,
treatment results in a 5 percentage point lower probability of a recommendation to enter school without delay. Like the ATE, however, this effect is not statistically different from zero. For the average untreated
child, in contrast, attending child care for 3 years or more increases
the probability of immediate school readiness by over 17 percentage
points, an effect that is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. This
sizable effect is approximately equal to a move from the 5th to the 50th percentile of the school readiness distribution predicted from the observed
characteristics (the percentiles reported in table 1).
D. IV Estimates
As Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2005, 2007) demonstrate, IV estimates,
like ATE, TT, and TUT, can be represented as weighted averages over the
MTE curve, with the weights dependent on the type of individuals who
change treatment status in response to changes in the instrument. We
plot these weights in figure 4, part C, which also displays the MTE curve
evaluated at the covariate values for children who changed treatment status in response to changes in the instrument (see eq. [30] in Cornelissen
et al. [2016] for exact calculations). The IV estimator gives the largest
weight to children with intermediate resistance to early child care attendance. When applying these weights to the MTE curve, we obtain a
weighted effect of 0.06 (dotted horizontal line in part C), which is close
to the linear IV effect of 0.07 (dashed horizontal line) obtained from the
two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimation. This closeness of results is reassuring and can be considered a specification check for the shape of the
MTE curve. However, conventional IV estimates, in addition to masking
considerable heterogeneity in the response to treatment, are difficult to
interpret because of the continuous nature of the instrument, especially
in a difference-in-difference setting like ours.33

33
As explained in detail in Cornelissen et al. (2016), the 2SLS estimator may be viewed
as a weighted average of local average treatment effects across r 2 r 0 pairs, when group indicator dummies Ri are used as instruments. The overall IV estimate is therefore representative for compliers at all values of the instrument, with different weights attached to the
groups of compliers at different pairs of values. In a difference-in-difference-IV setting like
ours, de Chaisemartin (2013) and de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfoeuille (2018) show that
strong restrictions on treatment effect heterogeneity are required to identify a well-defined
average of the underlying heterogeneous treatment effects.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2388

journal of political economy

E. Robustness Checks
The basic pattern of reverse selection on gains documented above is robust to a number of further alternative specifications. First, we relax the
assumption, implied by a linear MTE curve, that returns to treatment either increase or decrease monotonically with resistance to enrollment in
treatment. Accordingly, in figure 5, we depict MTE curves based on specifications that include a cubic and quartic of the propensity score in equation (4), enabling richer patterns such as a U-shaped MTE curve. These
curves also increase monotonically with resistance to early child care enrollment, with a shape that is generally similar to our baseline linear MTE
curve. A monotonically rising MTE curve is also observable using a
semiparametric approach.34 Hence, the basic shape of the MTE curve
is a robust phenomenon independent of the particular functional form.
In table 5, we report additional robustness checks that assume a linear
MTE curve like that in our baseline specification. In column 2, we do not
interact the child care coverage rate in the municipality with covariates in
the first-stage regression, and in column 3, we further omit the quadratic
term of the child care coverage rate. In column 4, we report results when
estimating the first stage semiparametrically.35 This is an important robustness check since misspecification in the estimated propensity score
can lead to bias in the MTE curve.36 Our findings remain unchanged.
In column 5, the instrument is the initial child care coverage rate in
1991 (when the oldest cohort in our sample was 3 years old) interacted
with cohort dummies. This specification thus uses only the variation in
child care supply across municipalities and over time, which can be explained by the predetermined degree of rationing at baseline, a key predictor of municipal child care expansion (table 2). In column 6, on the
other hand, we discard the intermediate examination years from 1996
to 2000 and employ only the variation between the pooled examination
years 1994/95 and 2001/2, thereby exploiting solely variation across municipalities in the intensity but not the timing of child care slot creation.
In both specifications, the pattern of reverse selection on gains remains
statistically significant at the 10 percent level (see the p-value in the penultimate row of cols. 5 and 6). In column 7, we make the sample more ho34
To estimate the semiparametric MTE curve, we follow the procedure detailed in
Heckman et al. (2006, app. B.2) using local quadratic regression to approximate K(p).
35
We classify the child care coverage rate Z into 14 equally sized bins (each with a width
of 0.05) and aggregate the X ’s into a linear index x 0 b predicted from a linear probability
model for the treatment decision and classify x 0 b into 20 equally sized bins. The
semiparametric estimation of P(Z ) then consists of a regression of the treatment dummy
on the full set of interactions of the 20 bin dummies of x 0 b and the 14 bin dummies of Z.
The resulting propensity score is highly correlated with our baseline propensity score (r 5
.987) and mirrors its concave shape in Z, suggesting that our baseline first stage approximates P(Z ) sufficiently flexibly.
36
We thank an anonymous referee for pointing this out.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2389

F IG . 5.—MTE curves: functional form robustness checks. The figure displays MTE curves
for the outcome of school readiness, evaluated at mean values of the covariates. The solid
MTE curve refers to our baseline specification, where the propensity score and its square
are included in equation (4), implying a linear MTE curve. The figure also shows three additional MTE curves that allow for richer patterns such as a U-shaped MTE curve: one curve
obtained from a semiparametric approach and two curves based on specifications, which include a cubic and quartic of the propensity score in equation (4). Source: Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.

mogeneous in age by restricting the sample to children born in the first
half of the calendar year, thereby ensuring that all children are examined
in the year they turn 6. Estimates in column 8 are based on the full sample
but control more flexibly for age at examination, replacing the quadratic
in age by monthly age dummies. Again, both specifications lead to a similar pattern of treatment effects and confirm an upward slope of the MTE
curve. Our findings also remain largely unaffected when we eliminate the
controls for child care quality (see col. 9).
In sum, the overall pattern of reverse selection on gains for the unobserved characteristics in the selection and outcome equations for school
readiness is a robust phenomenon.
F. Multivalued Treatment: Generalized Ordered
Choice Roy Model
So far, we have collapsed the years of child care attendance into a binary
treatment variable of attending child care for (at least) 3 years. Next, we

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2390

journal of political economy

explicitly take into account the multivalued nature of treatment. Specifically, we model selection as an ordered choice model, distinguishing between being enrolled in child care for 1, 2, or 3 years (or entering child
care at age 5, 4, or 3), and estimate two transition-specific MTE curves:
one for the decision to attend for 2 years versus 1 year and one for the decision to attend for 3 versus 2 years (as in Heckman et al. [2006] and
Heckman and Vytlacil [2007]). We now use as additional instruments
the child care coverage rate in the municipality in t 2 2 (2 years prior to
the school entry examination at approximately age 4) and its square, both
interacted with minority status, gender, and age, as in the baseline model.
First-stage results from a generalized ordered probit model, which allows
the instruments and covariates to differentially affect the decisions to attend child care for 2 or more years and to attend for 3 years, show that
the child care coverage rate at t 2 2 strongly predicts the probability of
starting child care at age 4, while the child care coverage rate at t 2 3 is
a strong determinant of enrolling in child care at age 3, as expected (see
app. A, table A1, and app. B for model details).
To obtain more precise estimates, we then estimate an outcome equation assuming joint normality between the errors in the selection and outcome equations (see app. B for details). We report results in table 6. As in
our baseline specification, the results show that minority children are disadvantaged relative to majority children in terms of school readiness if
they attend child care for 1 year only (coefficient on “minority”). This disadvantage decreases if minority children attend child care for 2 years (by
4.2 percentage points) and nearly disappears if minority children enroll
in child care early at age 3 (by 4.2 1 4.6 percentage points). A similar pattern emerges for gender, in line with our baseline specification. Since minority children and boys are less likely to attend child care at both the
2-year and the 3-year margins (app. table A1), the results from the generalized ordered probit model therefore confirm a reverse selection on gains
based on observed characteristics.
Figure 6 provides evidence in support of a reverse selection on gains
based also on unobserved characteristics. In the figure, we plot the
transition-specific MTE curves implied by the estimates in table 6. Both
MTE curves are upward sloping, and as rows 7 and 8 of table 6 show, both
slopes are statistically significant.37 The associated ATEs are about 0.01
for attending 2 versus 1 year of child care and 0.058 for attending 3 versus 2 years, suggesting that earlier interventions may be particularly
37
Define r1, r2, and r3 as the correlation coefficients between the three outcome error
terms and the selection error term. As we detail in app. B, r3 2 r2 and r2 2 r1 can be interpreted as the slopes of the two transition-specific MTE curves of attending child care
for 3 vs. 2 years and of attending child care for 2 years vs. 1 year, respectively. While the
slopes are significant, the levels of both MTE curves are insignificant in the lower part
of uD but become significant in the upper part, from approximately UD > 0:8.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

TABLE 6
Outcome Equation of Generalized Normal Ordered
Choice Roy Model
Variable
1. Female
2. Minority
3. Child care ≥ 2  female
4. Child care ≥ 2  minority
5. Child care ≥ 3  female
6. Child care ≥ 3  minority
Test for upward-sloping MTE curves:
7. r3 2 r2
8. r2 2 r1
Implied ATE:
9. 2 vs. 1 year
10. 3 vs. 2 years

Estimate
.081***
(.0095)
2.1070***
(.0268)
2.023***
(.0084)
.042**
(.0163)
2.020***
(.0046)
.046***
(.0097)
.030**
(.0120)
.046**
(.0194)
.0098
(.0453)
.0574
(.0386)

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.
Note.—The table presents results from the outcome equation of
a generalized normal ordered choice Roy model, modeling three
treatment states (attending child care for less than 2 years, for
2 years, or for 3 years or more). The model is described in more detail in app. B, and the first-stage results are shown in table A1 of
app. A. The outcome equation is estimated by including Heckmantype selection correction terms for all three treatment states generated
from the first-stage model and by interacting all covariates with
dummies for at least 2 years and at least 3 years of child care. For minority children, e.g., the coefficients on the interaction terms child
care ≥ 2  minority and child care ≥ 3  minority in rows 4 and 6 show
that minority children have a higher treatment effect for both moving from 1–2 years of child care and moving from 2–3 years of child
care. The variables r1, r2, and r3 are the correlations of the outcome
error terms in each of the three states (U1, U2, and U3) with the error
term of the selection equation denoted by V. The differences r3 2 r2
and r2 2 r1 are reported in rows 7 and 8 of the table and are informative on the pattern of selection, with positive values for the difference
indicating reverse selection on gains (a rising MTE curve). Transitionspecific ATEs (at mean values of covariates) are reported in rows 9
and 10 in the table, and the corresponding transition-specific MTE
curves are depicted in fig. 6. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered
at the municipality level are reported in parentheses. Number of observations is 131,845.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2392

journal of political economy

F IG . 6.—MTE curves from ordered selection model for 1, 2, and 3 years of child care.
The figure displays separate MTE curves for the effects of moving from 1 year of child care
to 2 years of child care (solid line) and moving from 2 years of child care to 3 years (dashed
line) for the outcome of school readiness based on a normal selection model with a generalized ordered probit selection equation (see app. B for a description of that model).
The curves are evaluated at mean values of the covariates. Both curves are statistically significantly upward sloping pointing toward a selection pattern of reverse selection on gains.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002,
as the main data source.

effective. The higher ATE at the 3- versus 2-year margin is compatible with
the notion of “skills beget skills” as emphasized, for instance, by Cunha
and Heckman (2007).
Modeling treatment as an ordered choice of attending child care for
either 1, 2, or 3 years rather than as a binary decision (our baseline definition) therefore does not qualitatively change our main findings.
G. Other Outcomes and Child Care Quality Characteristics
Having focused so far on school readiness as an index for the pediatrician’s overall assessment of the child’s physical and behavioral development, we now assess four additional outcomes linked to the school readiness examination: no motor skill problems, no compensatory sport
required, and two measures relating to BMI (for which smaller effects
are “better”). The summary treatment effects based on our baseline
specification that defines treatment as attending child care for 3 years

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2393

are reported in table 7, panel A. The results reveal the same selection
pattern for all outcomes, with the most beneficial effects of child care being found for untreated children. As indicated by the reported p-values,
selection based on unobserved gains is not statistically significant for motor skills and no compensatory sport (a zero slope of the MTE curve canTABLE 7
Other Outcomes
School
Readiness

Motor
Skills

No Compensatory Sport
Overweight Log BMI

A. Conventional Treatment Effects
ATE
TT
TUT
p -value of test for essential
heterogeneity

.059
.018
(.072) (.088)
2.051
.001
(.080) (.118)
.173** .035
(.085) (.103)
.029

.767

.203**
(.092)
.099
(.119)
.308***
(.115)
.214

.017
(.034)
.052
(.045)
2.019
(.037)

.025
(.023)
.045
(.028)
.003
(.027)

.071

.152

B. Effects of Child Care Quality Characteristics
Above-median child-to-staff
ratio  propensity score
Share of high educated
among staff  propensity
score
Share of male staff  male
child  propensity score
Share of male staff  female
child  propensity score

.005
(.031)

.041
(.034)

2.044
(.045)

2.016
(.019)

2.008
(.010)

.025
(.258)

.465*
(.267)

2.229
(.406)

2.003
(.113)

.035
(.075)
2.005**
(.002)

.013** .028***
(.007) (.007)

.033**
(.014)

2.008**
(.004)

.008
(.007)

.009
(.012)

2.009*** 2.006***
(.003)
(.002)

.015**
(.008)

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–
2002, as the main data source.
Note.—Panel A reports the average treatment effect (ATE), the treatment effect on the
treated (TT), the treatment effect on the untreated (TUT), and the p-value for a test of
essential heterogeneity for five outcomes: our main outcome of school readiness, no motor
skill problems, no compensatory sport required, overweight, measured as the BMI above
the (age- and gender-specific) 90th percentile, and the log BMI. Panel B displays coefficient estimates of the interaction terms between child care quality indicators and the propensity score; these terms measure how child care quality influences the returns to early
child care attendance. Further included controls not displayed in the table are age and
age squared and time-varying municipality sociodemographic characteristics as well as child
care quality indicators (interacted with the propensity score) as well as cohort dummies, municipality dummies, and birth month dummies (not interacted with the propensity score).
Coefficients on the interaction terms of share of male staff refer to a 1 percentage point
change in this share. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the municipality level are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2394

journal of political economy

not be rejected). For the overweight indicator (BMI > 90th percentile),
reverse selection on unobserved gains is significant at the 10 percent level,
while for log BMI significance falls just short of the 15 percent level.
Turning to the sign and magnitude of treatment effects, the estimated
ATE and TUT for no compensatory sport are sizable and statistically significant, implying that entering child care early improves physical health
for the average child and for the currently untreated child. The point estimates further suggest that child care attendance increases BMI and the
risk of overweight for the currently treated child; however, they are too
imprecisely estimated to be statistically significantly different from zero.38
Panel B of table 7 reports the results related to child care quality characteristics, which, in line with recent findings (e.g., Walters [2015] for evidence on Head Start), generally show no strong treatment effects on the
different outcomes for either child-to-staff ratio or staff education. Interestingly, however, they do provide some evidence that having male staff improves treatment effects across all outcomes for boys and also increases
motor skills and reduces the potentially harmful effects of early child care
attendance on BMI and overweight for girls. This effect could result from
male teachers serving as role models for boys, involving them in activities
they like, and being generally more likely than female staff to engage children in activities conducive to physical exercise.39
VI. Interpretation and Implications
A.

The Role of Family Background

Given our finding that, in terms of both observed and unobserved characteristics, children with the lowest resistance to early child care enrollment benefit the least from early child care attendance, we now attempt
to throw more light on the reverse selection on gains it implies. To this
end, we first investigate whether the increasing gains from treatment by
resistance to treatment (i.e., EðU1 2 U0 jUD 5 uD Þ in eq. [3]) are driven
by differences in the outcome when untreated (i.e., EðU0 jUD 5 uD Þ) or
by the differences in outcome when treated (i.e., EðU1 jUD 5 uD Þ). Specifically, adopting the procedure proposed by Brinch et al. (2017) based on
the control function estimator described in Heckman and Vytlacil (2007),
in figure 7, part A, we plot the separate curves for U1 and U0 for our main
outcome variable of school readiness. The pattern is striking: whereas the
38
In the US context, Herbst and Tekin (2010, 2012) report sizable increases in BMI and
overweight because of subsidized child care.
39
The evidence in the school literature on the effects of teacher gender is mixed. For
example, whereas Dee (2006) finds that teacher gender has a notable effect on the test performance of a sample of eighth graders, Bertrand and Pan (2013) identify no effect of
teacher gender on the gap in behavioral problems between boys and girls. We are unaware
of any evidence of teacher gender effects in the child care context.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2395

F IG . 7.—Counterfactual outcome (unobserved part) as a function of resistance to treatment, by treatment state. Part A: School readiness. Part B: Attended routine postnatal
checkups. Part C: Postnatal checkup book present. Part D: College degree mother. Part E:
College degree father. Part F: Single child. Part A plots, for our main outcome of school readiness, the unobserved component of the outcome against the unobserved resistance to treatment UD, separately for the treated (i.e., E½U1 jUD 5 uD , dashed line) and untreated (i.e.,
E½U0 jUD 5 uD , solid line) state, following Brinch et al. (2017). Parts B–F repeat the exercise
but use indicator variables for whether the child attended the first four routine postnatal
medical checkups before entry into child care (part B); whether the postnatal checkup book
is present at the examination (part C); whether the mother or father holds a college degree
(parts D and E); and whether the child is a single child (part F) as dependent variables, to
learn about how families with a low resistance to enroll their child in early child care differ
from families with a high resistance. Source: Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–2002, as the main data source.

curve in the untreated state U0 is falling, it is nearly flat in the treated state
U1. This pattern implies not only that the larger treatment effect on school
readiness among high- versus low-resistance children can be entirely explained by the former’s lower school readiness in the untreated state (falling U0) but also that early child care attendance serves as an equalizer that

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2396

journal of political economy
TABLE 8
Child Care Arrangements for 3-Year-Olds, 1994 and 2000 (%)

Public child care
Only family care (parents and other relatives)
Exclusively maternal care
Informal care (nanny, other nonrelatives)
Maternal labor force participation (3-year-olds)
Public child care, children of working mothers
Public child care, children of nonworking mothers

1994

2000

41.2
58.3
39.3
1.2
31.2
42.9
40.5

75.8
22.7
18.8
1.5
38.7
81.5
72.2

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on Family Survey from the German Youth Institute (DJI), Munich, second and third waves (1994 and 2000). The sample refers to 3-yearolds in West Germany and consists of 262 children in 1994 and 354 children in 2000.
Note.—The table provides, for the years 1994 and 2000, information on child care arrangements of 3-year-olds, distinguishing between public child care, only family care by
parents or grandparents, only maternal care, and care by a child minder or nanny. The table also reports labor force participation rates of mothers of 3-year-olds, as well as public
child care attendance rates of 3-year-olds separately by the mother’s labor force status.

almost removes the intergroup difference in school readiness (flat U1).
The nearly flat curve in the treated state further implies that quality differences between child care centers are small, reflecting the relatively homogeneous quality of child care centers in Germany (see Sec. IV.A).
This latter observation makes us wonder what type of child care arrangements families in Germany use when their children are not enrolled in early child care. In table 8 we compile data from the German
Family Survey on child care attendance, alternative child care arrangements, and maternal labor force participation for 3-year-olds residing
in West Germany in 1994 and 2000. The table shows that the alternative
to formal child care is almost exclusively family care, by either parents or
grandparents. Care outside the family by a child minder or nanny is extremely rare and is used by fewer than 2 percent of families.40 This finding
stands in contrast to the United States, where childhood interventions
not only replace family care but also partly crowd out other forms of
center-based child care (Walters 2015; Bitler et al. 2016; Elango et al. 2016;
Kline and Walters 2016).
Another feature of our setting is that mothers’ labor force participation rates—31 percent in 1994 and 39 percent in 2000—are much lower
than their offspring’s child care attendance rates. Thus, even though
early child care attendance is higher for the children of working mothers,
it is also common for those whose mothers do not work.
We are also curious to know how families with low early enrollment resistance differ from those with high resistance. To this end, in parts B–E
of figure 7, we again plot separate curves for U1 and U0 (as in part A) but
40
Even among highly educated mothers, the share using other types of informal care
was only 4 percent in 2000.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2397

using family background characteristics as the dependent variable. Once
we net out the effects of the observed characteristics included in the prior
analyses, U1 and U0 must be interpreted as the unobserved components of
family background characteristics. In parts B and C, the dependent variables are equal to one if the parents attended routine medical postnatal
checkups when the child was under 3 (i.e., prior to early child care attendance) and presented the checkup record at the school entry examination. Both variables are strongly positively associated with a more favorable family background and represent the only family background-related
data available over our entire sample period.41 According to the figure,
regardless of the child’s early care enrollment status, parents with low resistance to enrollment are more likely than those with high resistance to
have attended routine checkups and brought the checkup record to the
examination.
In parts D–F of the figure, we confirm a similar pattern using more
standard family background characteristics, such as parental education.
Because such variables are included in our data only from 2001 onward,
however, these illustrations refer to the 2001–3 time period when the
child care expansion was almost complete, and the analysis is thus based
on a less stringent identification strategy than previously. Nevertheless, it
still provides interesting insights into the differences between low- and
high-resistance children. First, regardless of the child’s enrollment status,
the parents of low-resistance (vs. high-resistance) children are more likely
to be college-educated (parts D and E), and the mothers of low-resistance
children are more likely to have only one child (part F). Overall, therefore,
the findings reported in figure 7, parts B–F, suggest that children with high
resistance to early child care enrollment come from a more disadvantaged family background than those with low resistance, which explains
why the former face worse outcomes than the latter when not enrolled
(see part A).
These observations give rise to two questions: First, given the potentially
large benefits to the children, why are disadvantaged children not enrolled
in early child care more often? Conversely, why do advantaged children attend child care early even when there are no apparent benefits? One important reason for these decisions may be that when choosing their children’s
care arrangements, parents maximize a welfare function that includes a
combination of their own utility and the child’s utility (see also Havnes
and Mogstad 2015). Thus, although advantaged parents could provide
their children with a high-quality home environment, they may nevertheless opt for child care because of their own labor market involvement or
41
For instance, for the examination cohorts 2001–3, only 81 percent of mothers without
any schooling degree presented the checkup record vs. around 93 percent of mothers with
an apprenticeship qualification (or higher).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2398

journal of political economy

their own preferences for leisure consumption, which may induce them
to enroll their child into early care even when not working.
A second important reason is that prior to and throughout the expansion period, enrollment decisions, in case of excess demand, were made
not only by parents but also by child care centers. The typical allocation
mechanism adopted by centers, which besides the child’s age as the primary admission criterion was based on mothers’ labor force status and
time on the waiting list, likely favored advantaged mothers, who are
more likely to work and who are also likely to be better informed about
the admission process than disadvantaged mothers.
Yet, even after the expansion of child care slots has been completed
and child care slots are principally available for all applicants, early child
care attendance rates of disadvantaged minority children lag behind
those of advantaged majority children. Besides lower labor market participation rates of disadvantaged minority mothers, the reason could
be that disadvantaged mothers are not as well informed about the benefits of public child care as advantaged mothers (e.g., Cunha et al. 2013;
Elango et al. 2016) or are generally more critical toward early child care
for cultural or religious reasons.42 In addition, despite heavy subsidies,
disadvantaged families may face higher child care costs (relative to income) than advantaged families, which may deter them from early child
care enrollment because they cannot borrow against their child’s future
income. In contrast, access to child care facilities, measured as the walking time to the nearest center, hardly varies between disadvantaged and
advantaged children.43
B. Policy Simulations
The higher returns to treatment for children with high versus low resistance to early child care enrollment imply that policies that succeed in at42
Schober and Stahl (2014), using data from the International Social Survey for West
Germany, show that negative attitudes toward child care (measured by agreement with such
statements as “family members should be the main care providers for children not attending
school yet”) are negatively correlated with individuals’ education and more common among
non-German respondents. With regard to the latter, a recent study by the Expert Council of
German Foundations on Integration and Migration (2015) finds the main reasons that minority children are less likely than majority children to be enrolled in early child care to be a
focus on the German language and absence of multilingualism in child care, in addition to
cultural factors such as different child-rearing beliefs (love and care by the mother instead of
fostering early independence).
43
According to data from the 1994 German Family Survey for West Germany, 80 percent
of women with high secondary schooling lived within a 15-minute walking distance to a
child care center vs. 75 percent of women with low secondary schooling. Data for West Germany from the German Socio-Economic Panel for 1994 show that 55 percent of children of
immigrant origin resided within a 10-minute walking distance to a child care facility vs. 51 percent of children of majority origin.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2399

tracting high-resistance children into child care have large benefits. We
therefore quantify these benefits for four different policies with a focus
on our main outcome variable of school readiness. To do so, we compute
policy-relevant treatment effects (PRTE; see Heckman and Vytlacil 2001,
2005; Carneiro et al. 2011) as a weighted average over the MTE curve with
the weights reflecting the population of individuals shifted by the policy
(see eq. [29] in Cornelissen et al. [2016] for a formal definition).
We first simulate a policy that brings the average early attendance rate
(or, equivalently, the propensity score) from its 2002 level of 0.67 to a level
of 0.9, as advocated by the European Union in its Barcelona targets (European Union 2002). Similarly to Carneiro et al., we model the increase
in the propensity score in two different ways: by adding the same constant
to each child’s 2002 propensity score to produce an average of 0.9 and by
multiplying each score by the same constant. We set to one any resulting
propensity scores that would be larger than one. Both procedures give very
similar results (see table 9, rows 1 and 2) and show large and statistically

TABLE 9
Policy-Relevant Treatment Effects
Propensity Score

1. Bring 2002 P(Z ) to .9 by adding .275
2. Bring 2002 P(Z ) to .9 by multiplying 1.5
3. Lift 2002 cohort’s coverage rate (Z ) to 1 if < 1
4. Add .4 to 2002 cohort’s coverage rate (Z )

PRTE
(1)

Baseline
(2)

Policy
(3)

.160*
(.085)
.165*
(.087)
.123
(.077)
.141*
(.086)

.67

.90

.67

.90

.67

.71

.67

.72

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–
2002, as the main data source.
Note.—The table reports in col. 1 policy-relevant treatment effects (PRTE) per net child
shifted for four different policies. In rows 1 and 2, we simulate a policy that brings the average early attendance rate (or, equivalently, the propensity score) from its 2002 level of
0.67 to a level of 0.9 by adding a constant of 0.275 to each child’s 2002 propensity score
(row 1) or by multiplying each child’s 2002 propensity score by a constant of 1.5 (row 2).
In rows 3 and 4, we instead directly manipulate the 2002 cohort’s child care coverage rate
(i.e., the coverage rate measured in 1999, when the 2002 cohort was 3 years old—our instrument). In row 3, we set the coverage rate to 1 for municipalities in which it is below 1; in row
4, we instead add a constant of 0.4 to the coverage rate, allowing for coverage rates greater
than 1 in some municipalities. Columns 2 and 3 show the increase in the propensity score
that each policy induces. Estimates refer to our baseline specification displayed in cols. 1
and 2 of table 4 and part A of fig. 4. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the municipality level are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2400

journal of political economy

significant PRTEs, implying an increase in school readiness of 16–17 percentage points per child shifted.
Modeling a policy by direct manipulation of the propensity score, however, says nothing about how to actually draw more highly resistant children into early child care. Because one intuitive solution is to create more
child care slots, in rows 3 and 4 of table 9, we simulate two policies that
directly manipulate the child care coverage rate (our instrument) and
thus affect the propensity score indirectly through the number of available child care slots. In the first policy (row 3), we simulate the effect
of increasing the 2002 cohort’s coverage rate (i.e., the coverage rate measured in 1999, when the 2002 cohort was 3 years old) to one for municipalities in which it is below one. In the second policy (row 4), we simply
add a constant of 0.4 to the 2002 cohort’s coverage rate. Both these policies shift children with high treatment effects from unobserved characteristics into treatment, thereby increasing the probability of school
readiness by 12.3 and 14.1 percentage points, respectively, per child shifted,
which in the latter case is statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
Nevertheless, despite the sizable expansion in child care slots, these policies increase early child care attendance by only 4–5 percentage points
and induce no change in the early child care attendance rate of minority
children (who experience particularly large improvements in school readiness from early child care). We attribute this minimal effect to the concavity of the relation between the child care supply and the propensity to
early child care attendance in both majority and (particularly) minority
children (see table 4 and fig. 2). These findings emphasize that creating
additional child care slots alone is not enough to attract more children
(and specifically minority children) into child care. Thus, to achieve attendance rates of 90 percent as advocated by the European Union, the expansion in child care slots should be complemented by other policies such as
informational campaigns or free access to child care for disadvantaged
and minority families.
VII.

Conclusions

In this paper, we assess the heterogeneity in the effects of universal child
care on child development at the age of school entry by estimating marginal returns to early child care attendance. Building on a tighter identification strategy than adopted in the related MTE literature and using
novel administrative data on child outcomes in a context in which all children undergo standardized and mandatory school entry examinations,
we document substantial heterogeneity in the returns to early child care
attendance with respect to both observed and unobserved child characteristics. For our main outcome of school readiness, we find that when attending child care late, minority children are 12 percentage points less

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2401

likely to be ready for school than majority children. Attending child care
early, however, nearly eliminates the differences between minority and
majority children. Yet despite these larger returns from treatment, minority children are substantially less likely than majority children to enter
child care early, pointing to a pattern of reverse selection on gains based
on these observed child characteristics. We document a similar pattern
for unobserved child characteristics: children with unobserved characteristics that make them least likely to enter child care early benefit the most
from early child care attendance. We also provide evidence that these
children may be disproportionately drawn from disadvantaged family backgrounds.
Overall, our results show not only that heterogeneity in children’s responses to early child care attendance and parental resistance to child enrollment are key when evaluating universal child care programs but also
that parents’ choices on behalf of their children may differ from those
that the children themselves would make. They further suggest that the
universal child care program that we study disproportionately subsidizes
advantaged families whose children have the least to gain from early child
care attendance. At the same time, it does not sufficiently reach minority
and disadvantaged families whose children would benefit the most from
the program.
These observations raise the question, what type of policies could be implemented to draw these hard-to-reach children into early child care? One
important first step (recently enacted by some German states) may be to
make child care free for disadvantaged families while eliminating, or at
least reducing, subsidies to advantaged families, thereby possibly improving child outcomes without increasing public spending. Such a policy,
however, does not address the informational deficits and the cultural or religious concerns that may make disadvantaged and minority families resistant to enrollment in public child care and prevent them from fully appreciating its advantages. Hence, policies that inform disadvantaged families
about the benefits of early child care ought to take account of cultural heterogeneity. They should carefully address culturally or religiously motivated concerns of parents while actively supporting their children’s enrollment in programs to improve the take-up rate of hard-to-reach children.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2402

journal of political economy

Appendix A
Additional Tables and Figures

F IG . A1.—Common support of propensity score: instrument not interacted with covariates. Part A: Quadratic specification of the instrument. Part B: Linear specification of the
instrument. The figure plots the frequency distribution of the propensity score by treatment status. Part A of the figure is based on a quadratic specification in the instrument
in the selection equation (as in the robustness check in col. 2 of table 5), while part B is
based on a linear specification in the instrument (as in the robustness check of col. 3 in
table 5). Source: Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems,
1994–2002, as the main data source.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2403

TABLE A1
First Stage of Normal Ordered Selection Model

Child care coverage rate
Child care coverage rate squared
Child care coverage rate  minority
Child care coverage rate squared  minority
Female
Minority

Marginal Effects on
P(Child Care ≥ 3)
(1)

Marginal Effects on
P(Child Care ≥ 2)
(2)

.224***
(.0649)
2.1726
(.1908)
.314**
(.1447)
2.5938
(.4929)
.015***
(.0037)
2.214***
(.0156)

.103**
(.0422)
2.204*
(.1145)
.1115
(.0792)
.0022
(.2414)
.006**
(.0026)
2.177***
(.0076)

Source.—Authors’ calculations based on school entry examinations, Weser-Ems, 1994–
2002, as the main data source.
Note.—The table presents the first-stage results from the ordered normal selection
model in table 6. The model is described in more detail in app. B. The child care coverage
rates are measured relative to their overall mean. In col. 1, the child care coverage rate refers to t 2 3 (the year in which a child who wants to attend for 3 years would typically enter
child care). In col. 2, the child care coverage rate refers to t 2 2 (the year in which a child
who wants to attend for 2 years would typically enter child care). The marginal effects are
computed after estimation of a generalized ordered probit model, in which all covariates
and instruments are allowed to have varying effects on the thresholds. All covariates that
are also in our baseline specification in table 4 are included but not reported to save space.
Bootstrapped standard errors clustered at the municipality level are reported in parentheses. Number of observations is 131,845.
* Statistically significant at the .10 level.
** Statistically significant at the .05 level.
*** Statistically significant at the .01 level.

Appendix B
Normal Generalized Ordered Choice Roy Model
We extend our baseline analysis to multiple treatment states and associated outcomes by implementing a generalized ordered choice Roy model (Heckman et al.
2006; Heckman and Vytlacil 2007) based on joint normality of the errors in the
selection and outcome equations. Instead of the binary choice model in (2), we
now have an ordered choice model:
Si 5 1

if Zi g 2 Vi ≤ k1 ,

Si 5 2

if k1 < Zi g 2 Vi ≤ k2 ,

Si 5 3

if k2 < Zi g 2 Vi ,

in which Si is the multivalued treatment variable (1, 2, or 3 years of child care
attendance), Zi g 2 Vi is a latent linear index, and k1 and k2 are two threshold pa-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2404

journal of political economy

rameters. For simplicity, we write the thresholds as constants, but in our empirical analysis we allow the thresholds to depend on the regressors.44
There are three potential outcomes Yji 5 X bj 1 Uji for j 5 f1, 2, 3g, and the
observed outcome is equal to Yi 5 o3j51 I ðSi 5 jÞYji , where I() is the indicator
function.
Assume joint normality of (U1i, U2i, U3i, Vi) and define
p1 5 PðSi > 1Þ 5 PðVi ≤ Zi g 2 k1 Þ 5 FðZi g 2 k1 Þ,
p2 5 PðSi > 2Þ 5 PðVi ≤ Zi g 2 k2 Þ 5 FðZi g 2 k2 Þ,
rj 5 CorrðUji , Vi Þ:
The expectations of U1i, U2i, and U3i conditional on the treatment state in
which each of them is observed can then be expressed as
E ½U1i jSi 5 1 5 E ½U1i jZi g 2 k1 < Vi  5 r1
5 r1

fðZi g 2 k1 Þ
1 2 FðZi g 2 k1 Þ

fðF21 ðp1 ÞÞ
,
1 2 p1

E ½U2i jSi 5 2 5 E ½U2i jZi g 2 k2 < Vi ≤ Zi g 2 k1 
5 r2

fðZi g 2 k2 Þ 2 fðZi g 2 k1 Þ
FðZi g 2 k1 Þ 2 FðZi g 2 k2 Þ

5 r2

fðF21 ðp2 ÞÞ 2 fðF21 ðp1 ÞÞ
,
p1 2 p2

E ½U3i jSi 5 3 5 E ½U3i jVi ≤ Zi g 2 k2  5 r3

2fðF21 ðp2 ÞÞ
:
p2

The ratios on the right-hand side of these expressions are Heckman-type selection correction terms. We construct them on the basis of predictions of p1 and p2
from the first-stage generalized ordered probit model and include them as correction terms into the outcome equation. The associated coefficients provide estimates for r1, r2, and r3. We obtain standard errors by bootstrapping, including
both the first and second stages into the bootstrap loop.
The transition-specific MTE curves, which we depict at means of the covariates
in figure 6, have the following representation that directly follows from the joint
normality of (U1i, U2i, U3i, Vi):
21
DMTE
1,2 ðx, ud Þ 5 x ðb2 2 b1 Þ 1 ðr2 2 r1 ÞF ðud Þ,
21
DMTE
2,3 ðx, ud Þ 5 x ðb3 2 b2 Þ 1 ðr3 2 r2 ÞF ðud Þ:

44
Given the normality assumption, the model in which the thresholds depend on the
regressors is a generalized ordered probit model, which we estimate in Stata using the command goprobit by Stefan Boes.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2405

References
Aakvik, Arild, James J. Heckman, and Edward J. Vytlacil. 2005. “Estimating Treatment Effects for Discrete Outcomes When Responses to Treatment Vary: An
Application to Norwegian Vocational Rehabilitation Programs.” J. Econometrics
125 (1–2): 15 –51.
Aizer, Anna, and Flávio Cunha. 2012. “The Production of Child Human Capital:
Endowments, Investments and Fertility.” Working Paper no. 18429, NBER,
Cambridge, MA.
Baker, Michael. 2011. “Innis Lecture: Universal Early Childhood Interventions:
What Is the Evidence Base?” Canadian J. Econ./Revue Canadienne d’Économique
44 (4): 1069–1105.
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. 2008. “Universal Child
Care, Maternal Labor Supply, and Family Well-Being.” J.P.E. 116 (4): 709–45.
———. 2018. “The Long-Run Impacts of a Universal Child Care Program.”
American Econ. J.: Econ. Policy, forthcoming.
Balfe, Cathy. 2015. “Heterogeneity, Selection and Advantage in the Graduate
and Non-graduate Labour Market.” Manuscript, Univ. Coll. London.
Basu, Anirban, Andrew M. Jones, and Pedro Rosa Dias. 2014. “The Roles of Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills in Moderating the Effects of Mixed-Ability
Schools on Long-Term Health.” Working Paper no. 20811, NBER, Cambridge,
MA.
Becker, Gary S. 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to Education. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. “The Family and the State.” J. Law
and Econ. 31 (1): 1–18.
Berlinski, Samuel, Sebastian Galiani, and Paul Gertler. 2009. “The Effect of Preprimary Education on Primary School Performance.” J. Public Econ. 93 (1–2):
219–34.
Berlinski, Samuel, Sebastian Galiani, and Marco Manacorda. 2008. “Giving Children a Better Start: Preschool Attendance and School-Age Profiles.” J. Public
Econ. 92 (5– 6): 1416– 40.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Jessica Pan. 2013. “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior.” American Econ. J.: Appl.
Econ. 5 (1): 32– 64.
Bitler, Marianne P., Hilary W. Hoynes, and Thurston Domina. 2016. “Experimental Evidence on Distributional Effects of Head Start.” Manuscript, Univ. California, Davis.
Björklund, Anders, and Robert Moffitt. 1987. “The Estimation of Wage Gains and
Welfare Gains in Self-Selection Models.” Rev. Econ. and Statis. 69 (1): 42–49.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. “Too Young to
Leave the Nest? The Effects of School Starting Age.” Rev. Econ. and Statis. 93
(2): 455–67.
Brave, Scott, and T. Walstrum. 2014. “Estimating Marginal Treatment Effects Using Parametric and Semiparametric Methods.” Stata J. 14 (1): 191–217.
Brinch, Christian N., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall. 2017. “Beyond LATE
with a Discrete Instrument.” J.P.E. 125 (4): 985 –1039.
Carneiro, Pedro, and Rita Ginja. 2014. “Long-Term Impacts of Compensatory
Preschool on Health and Behavior: Evidence from Head Start.” American Econ.
J.: Econ. Policy 6 (4): 135 –73.
Carneiro, Pedro, James J. Heckman, and Edward J. Vytlacil. 2011. “Estimating
Marginal Returns to Education.” A.E.R. 101 (6): 2754 –81.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2406

journal of political economy

Carneiro, Pedro, Michael Lokshin, Cristobal Ridao-Cano, and Nithin Umapathi.
2017. “Average and Marginal Returns to Upper Secondary Schooling in Indonesia.” J. Appl. Econometrics 32 (1): 16–36.
Cascio, Elizabeth, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2013. “The Impacts of
Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool Education.” Brookings Papers
Econ. Activity (Fall): 127–92.
Casey, Teresa, and Christian Dustmann. 2008. “Intergenerational Transmission
of Language Capital and Economic Outcomes.” J. Human Resources 43 (3):
660–87.
Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen. 2005. “An IV Model of Quantile
Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 73 (1): 245–61.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane
Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star.” Q. J.E.
126 (4): 1593–1660.
Cornelissen, Thomas, Christian Dustmann, Anna Raute, and Uta Schönberg.
2016. “From LATE to MTE: Alternative Methods for the Evaluation of Policy
Interventions.” Labour Econ. 41:47–60.
Cunha, Flávio, Irma Elo, and Jennifer Culhane. 2013. “Eliciting Maternal Expectations about the Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation.” Working Paper
no. 19144, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Cunha, Flávio, and James J. Heckman. 2007. “The Technology of Skill Formation.” A.E.R. 97 (2): 31–47.
———. 2008. “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” J. Human Resources 43 (4): 738–82.
Currie, Janet, and Douglas Almond. 2011. “Human Capital Development before
Age Five.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B, edited by David Card and
Orley Ashenfelter, chap. 15. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Does Head Start Make a Difference?”
A.E.R. 85 (3): 341–64.
Datta Gupta, Nabanita, and Marianne Simonsen. 2010. “Non-cognitive Child
Outcomes and Universal High Quality Child Care.” J. Public Econ. 94 (1–2):
30– 43.
de Chaisemartin, Clement. 2013. “A Note on the Assumptions Underlying Instrumented Difference in Differences.” Manuscript, Univ. Warwick.
de Chaisemartin, Clement, and Xavier D’Haultfoeuille. 2018. “Fuzzy Differencesin-Differences.” Rev. Econ. Studies 85 (2): 999–1028.
Dee, Thomas S. 2006. “The Why Chromosome: How a Teacher’s Gender Affects
Boys and Girls.” Education Next 6 (4): 68 –75.
Deming, David, and Susan Dynarski. 2008. “The Lengthening of Childhood.” J.
Econ. Perspectives 22 (3): 71–92.
Department for Education. 2014. Early Years Foundation Stage Profile: Handbook.
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data
/file/301256/2014_EYFS_handbook.pdf.
Doyle, Joseph J. 2007. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster Care.” A.E.R. 97 (5): 1583 –1610.
Duncan, Greg J., Chantelle J. Dowsett, Amy Claessens, et al. 2007. “School Readiness and Later Achievement.” Developmental Psychology 43 (6): 1428–46.
Dustmann, Christian, Patrick Puhani, and Uta Schönberg. 2017. “The LongTerm Effects of Early Track Choice.” Econ. J. 127 (603): 1348–80.
Ebbeling, Cara B., Dorota B. Pawlak, and David S. Ludwig. 2002. “Childhood Obesity: Public Health Crisis, Common Sense Cure.” Lancet 360 (9331): 473–82.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2407

Elango, Sneha, Jorge Luis García, James J. Heckman, and Andrés P. Hojman.
2016. “Early Childhood Education.” In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, vol. 2, edited by Robert A. Moffitt. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
European Union. 2002. Presidency Conclusions. Barcelona European Council,
March 15 and 16. http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs
/pressdata/en/ec/71025.pdf.
Expert Council of German Foundations on Integration and Migration. 2015.
Hürdenlauf zur Kita: Warum Eltern mit Migrationshintergrund ihr Kind seltener in die
frühkindliche Tagesbetreuung schicken. http://www.svr-migration.de/wp-content
/uploads/2014/11/SVR_FB_Kita_Web.pdf.
Felfe, Christina, and Rafael Lalive. 2018. “Does Early Child Care Affect Children’s Development?” J. Public Econ. 159 (March): 33–53.
Felfe, Christina, Natalia Nollenberger, and Nuria Rodriguez-Planas. 2015. “Can’t
Buy Mommy’s Love? Universal Childcare and Children’s Long-Term Cognitive
Development.” J. Population Econ. 28 (2): 393–422.
French, Eric, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on
Labor Supply.” American Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 6 (2): 291–337.
French, Eric, and Christopher Taber. 2011. “Identification of Models of the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4A, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, chap. 6. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer Term Effects
of Head Start.” A.E.R. 92 (4): 999–1012.
Grissmer, David, Kevin J. Grimm, Sophie M. Aiyer, William M. Murrah, and Joel S.
Steele. 2010. “Fine Motor Skills and Early Comprehension of the World:
Two New School Readiness Indicators.” Developmental Psychology 46 (5): 1008–
17.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education
and Parental Time with Children.” J. Econ. Perspectives 22 (3): 23–46.
Hart, Betty, and Todd R. Risley. 1995. Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children. Baltimore: Brookes.
Havnes, Tarjei, and Magne Mogstad. 2011. “No Child Left Behind: Subsidized
Child Care and Children’s Long-Run Outcomes.” American Econ. J.: Econ. Policy
3 (2): 97–129.
———. 2015. “Is Universal Child Care Leveling the Playing Field?” J. Public Econ.
127 ( July): 100–114.
Heckman, James J. 1997. “Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral
Assumptions Used in Making Program Evaluations.” J. Human Resources 32 (3):
441–62.
———. 2007. “The Economics, Technology, and Neuroscience of Human Capability Formation.” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104 (33): 13250–55.
Heckman, James J., and Tim Kautz. 2014. “Fostering and Measuring Skills: Interventions That Improve Character and Cognition.” In The Myth of Achievement
Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life, edited by James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Tim Kautz, 293–317. Chicago: Univ. Chicago
Press.
Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam
Yavitz. 2010a. “Analyzing Social Experiments as Implemented: A Reexamination of the Evidence from the HighScope Perry Preschool Program.” Quantitative Econ. 1 (1): 1–46.
———. 2010b. “The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program.” J. Public Econ. 94 (1–2): 114–28.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2408

journal of political economy

Heckman, James J., Sergio Urzua, and Edward J. Vytlacil. 2006. “Understanding
Instrumental Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity.” Rev. Econ. and
Statis. 88 (3): 389–432.
Heckman, James J., and Edward J. Vytlacil. 1999. “Local Instrumental Variables
and Latent Variable Models for Identifying and Bounding Treatment Effects.”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96 (8): 4730–34.
———. 2001. “Policy-Relevant Treatment Effects.” A.E.R. 91 (2): 107–11.
———. 2005. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and Econometric Policy
Evaluation.” Econometrica 73 (3): 669–738.
———. 2007. “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part II: Using the
Marginal Treatment Effect to Organize Alternative Econometric Estimators
to Evaluate Social Programs, and to Forecast Their Effects in New Environments.” In Handbook of Econometrics, edited by James J. Heckman and Edward
E. Leamer, chap. 71. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Herbst, Chris M., and Erdal Tekin. 2010. “Child Care Subsidies and Childhood
Obesity.” Rev. Econ. Household 9 (3): 349–78.
———. 2012. “The Geographic Accessibility of Child Care Subsidies and Evidence on the Impact of Subsidy Receipt on Childhood Obesity.” J. Urban Econ.
71 (1): 37–52.
Kaufmann, Katja M. 2014. “Understanding the Income Gradient in College Attendance in Mexico: The Role of Heterogeneity in Expected Returns.” Quantitative Econ. 5 (3): 583–630.
Kline, Patrick, and Christopher Walters. 2016. “Evaluating Public Programs with
Close Substitutes: The Case of Head Start.” Q. J.E. 131 (4): 1795–1848.
Kottelenberg, Michael J., and Steven F. Lehrer. 2017. “Targeted or Universal Coverage? Assessing Heterogeneity in the Effects of Universal Child Care.” J. Labor
Econ. 35 (3): 609–53.
Kromeyer-Hauschild, Katrin, Martin Wabitsch, Diana L. Kunze, et al. 2001.
“Perzentile für den Body-Mass-Index für das Kindes- und Jugendalter unter
Heranziehung verschiedener deutscher Stichproben.” Monatsschrift Kinderheilkunde 149 (8): 807–18.
Lower Saxony State Office for Statistics. 2004. “Einrichtungen und Personal der
Jugendhilfe 2002.” Statistische Berichte Niedersachsen, Niedersächsisches Landesamt für Statistik, Hannover.
———. 2005. “Tabelle D11.1: Anteil der vorzeitig bzw. verspätet eingeschulten
Kinder.” https://www.bildungsmonitoring.de/bildung/online/.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt.” A.E.R. 103 (5): 1797–1829.
Magnuson, K. A., C. Ruhm, and J. Waldfogel. 2007. “Does Prekindergarten Improve School Preparation and Performance?” Econ. Educ. Rev. 26 (1): 33–51.
Nybom, Martin. 2017. “The Distribution of Lifetime Earnings Returns to College.” J. Labor Econ. 35 (4): 903–52.
OECD. 2005. Education at a Glance 2005. Paris: Org. Econ. Co-operation and Development.
———. 2006. Starting Strong II. Paris: Org. Econ. Co-operation and Development.
Pagani, Linda S., Caroline Fitzpatrick, Isabelle Archambault, and Michel Janosz.
2010. “School Readiness and Later Achievement: A French Canadian Replication and Extension.” Developmental Psychology 46 (5): 984 – 94.
Rowe, Meredith L. 2008. “Child-Directed Speech: Relation to Socioeconomic
Status, Knowledge of Child Development and Child Vocabulary Skill.” J. Child
Language 35:185–205.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

who beneﬁts from universal child care?

2409

Ruhm, Christopher J., and Jane Waldfogel. 2012. “Long-Term Effects of Early
Childhood Care and Education.” Nordic Econ. Policy Rev. (1): 23–51.
Samuelsson, Ingrid Pramling, Sonja Sheridan, and Pia Williams. 2006. “Five Preschool Curricula—Comparative Perspective.” Internat. J. Early Childhood 38 (1):
11–30.
Sandner, Malte, and Tanja Jungmann. 2016. “How Much Can We Trust Maternal
Ratings of Early Child Development in Disadvantaged Samples?” Econ. Letters
141 (April): 73–76.
Schober, Pia S., and Juliane F. Stahl. 2014. Trends in Der Kinderbetreuung: Sozioökonomische Unterschiede Verstärken Sich in Ost Und West. DIW Wochenbericht
no. 40. http://www.diw.de/sixcms/detail.php?id5diw_01.c.483741.de.
Shonkoff, Jack P., and Deborah A. Phillips. 2000. From Neurons to Neighborhoods:
The Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington, DC: Nat. Acad. Press.
Vytlacil, Edward J. 2002. “Independence, Monotonicity, and Latent Index Models: An Equivalence Result.” Econometrica 70 (1): 331– 41.
Walters, Christopher. 2015. “Inputs in the Production of Early Childhood Human Capital: Evidence from Head Start.” American Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 7 (4):
76–102.
Wang, Claire Y., Klim McPherson, Tim Marsh, Steven L. Gortmaker, and Martin
Brown. 2011. “Health and Economic Burden of the Projected Obesity Trends
in the USA and the UK.” Lancet 378:815 –25.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on October 17, 2019 08:59:47 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

