TESTING RANK SIMILARITY
Brigham R. Frandsen and Lars J. Lefgren*
Abstract—We introduce a test of the rank invariance or rank similarity
assumption common in treatment effects and instrumental variables models.
The test probes the implication that the conditional distribution of ranks
should be identical across treatment states using a regression-based test
statistic. We apply the test to data from the Tennessee STAR class-size
reduction experiment and show that systematic slippages in rank can be
important statistically and economically.

I.

Introduction

M

ANY recent developments in econometric theory
concern the importance of unobserved heterogeneity in individuals’ responses to a treatment. Heterogeneity
matters for the policy relevance and interpretation of treatment effects: a treatment that is beneficial on average may
nevertheless harm many individuals. Treatment effect heterogeneity also matters for econometric identification of
structural (causal) parameters. A restriction on heterogeneity that requires individuals’ relative ranks across treatment
states to be preserved identifies population—as opposed to
local—average treatment effects (ATE) and justifies models
restricting to scalar outcome disturbances. Finally, treatment
effect heterogeneity may influence how individuals select
into treatment.
Characterizing treatment effect heterogeneity requires
assumptions about a subject’s rank in counterfactual treatment states. A common benchmark is rank invariance, which
means the subject’s rank is the same in both the treated and
control distributions. Under this assumption, the distribution of treatment effects is identified and quantile treatment
effects can be interpreted as effects on individuals at given
points of the distribution. Researchers can also identify an
intervention’s ATE even in the absence of perfect compliance to the instrument, where otherwise only a local average
treatment effect (LATE) may be identified.
A generalization, rank similarity, requires only the conditional distribution of ranks—not the ranks themselves—to be
identical in all treatment states, conditional on factors influencing treatment status (Chernozhukov & Hansen, 2005).
This weaker assumption loses the ability to point identify the
distribution of treatment effects, but it preserves the ability
to identify ATE and population quantile treatment effects.
We propose a method for examining rank similarity and
rank invariance in a setting with a (possibly endogenous)
binary treatment. The test consists of comparing the estimated distribution of treated and control ranks, conditional
on some observed variable S, using a regression-based statistic. S is a predetermined variable in addition to any covariates
X required for identification. Variables that predict outcomes
Received for publication November 13, 2015. Revision accepted for
publication February 8, 2017. Editor: Bryan S. Graham.
* Brigham Young University.
A supplemental appendix is available online at http://www.mitpress
journals.org/doi/suppl/10.1162/REST_a_00675.

but are uncorrelated with treatment status conditional on X—
and so not needed for identification—make good candidates.
Under rank invariance or similarity, the treated and control
ranks have identical distributions conditional on S, while
under violations, the distributions will diverge, provided S is
related to outcomes. For example, consider the case of a randomized job training program with perfect compliance. Prior
earnings, a candidate S variable, is correlated with outcomes
in the absence of treatment. Consequently, the distribution
of ranks for control subjects with high prior earnings should
have higher mass in the top of the distribution. If the treated
and control distributions exhibit rank similarity with respect
to prior earnings, the distribution of ranks for treated subjects with high prior earnings should be shifted in precisely
the same way.
A failure to reject may justify rank similarity or invariance assumptions and the additional identification power
they garner. The test also motivates weaker partially identifying restrictions that imply bounds on the distribution of
treatment effects (Frandsen & Lefgren, 2016). Rank invariance also justifies classes of models with scalar outcome
disturbances (Newey & Powell, 2003; Chesher, 2005; Chernozhukov, Imbens, & Newey, 2007). Nevertheless, inference
following the rank similarity test risks the same problem
of nonuniformity that Cochrane (1991) pointed out in the
case of time series analysis following unit root tests, or
by Guggenberger (2010) for instrumental variables analysis,
unless inference is based on characterizations of the limiting
behavior of the estimators that are robust to violations of
rank similarity, as in Wüthrich (2014).
Rejecting rank similarity is also potentially interesting.
First, the testing procedure itself shows which groups benefit relative to others under the treatment. Second, a rejection
implies that at a minimum, the testing variable S should
be included as a control if researchers nevertheless want
to impose rank similarity. Including additional controls,
however, changes the estimand in quantile models.
Our paper complements the literature on treatment effects,
nonseparable models, and quantile instrumental variables
models. The notion of rank invariance in treatment effects
was introduced by Doksum (1974), who used the idea of
an underlying “proneness” to interpret effects on different
quantiles of the outcome distribution. Heckman, Smith, and
Clements (1997) consider rank invariance (perfect positive
dependence) as an extreme case to obtain bounds on the
joint distribution of potential outcomes. In the nonparametric
IV literature, the assumption that the outcome is monotonic
in a scalar disturbance, separable or nonseparable, imposes
rank invariance. For example, Newey and Powell’s (2003)
nonparametric instrumental variables model relies on a rank
invariance assumption in the form of a scalar separable outcome disturbance for identification, as do Chesher (2005),

The Review of Economics and Statistics, March 2018, 100(1): 86–91
© 2018 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
doi:10.1162/REST_a_00675

TESTING RANK SIMILARITY

Athey and Imbens (2006), and Chernozhukov et al. (2007)
but with a nonseparable outcome disturbance. Chernozhukov
and Hansen’s (2005) IV quantile model imposes rank similarity for identification of average treatment effects and rank
invariance for interpretation of quantile treatment effects.
Our paper builds on this literature by introducing a test of
the assumptions needed for identification or interpretation in
these models.
The intuition for our testing procedure is similar to Bitler,
Gelbach, and Hoynes’s (2005) idea for testing for rank reversals using predetermined covariates in the context of an
exogenous treatment. Our method builds on their work by
generalizing to endogenous treatments. In concurrent work,
Dong and Shen (2018) develop a test for rank similarity
based on a similar framework. Like ours, their test compares
features of the conditional distribution of estimated ranks
across treatment states. Their test examines a finite set of
quantiles and may be more sensitive to differences in shape;
our main specification is based on instrumental variables
regression and may have more power against location shifts.
Our paper complements theirs in two primary ways. First,
their test relies on the assumption of monotonicity in the relationship between the instrument and treatment to calculate
ranks for compliers. In contrast, we set up our test in a quite
general estimation framework that can include monotonicity as a special case when that assumption is appropriate,
but need not impose it. Second, our instrumental variables
estimation-based test is directly informative about the magnitude and nature of any deviations from rank similarity,
while the reduced-form test of Dong and Shen is not.
II.

Econometric Framework and Test Procedures

Consider the standard treatment effects framework with a
binary treatment D and a continuously distributed outcome
Y . Let Y (1) and Y (0) be potential outcomes with and without treatment, with CDFs F1 and F0 . The observed outcome
is Y = Y (D). We also observe a q-vector of pretreatment
variables S and, in the case of an endogenous treatment, an
instrumental variable Z. The pretreatment variables S are
in addition to any covariates X required for identification,
which we suppress for clarity. All results that follow can
be taken to hold conditional on X, and the online appendix
shows how to adapt the testing procedure for covariates.
Define an individual’s rank in the untreated and treated
distributions to be, respectively: U (0) := F0 (Y (0)) and
U (1) := F1 (Y (1)). The marginal distributions of U (0) and
U (1) are uniform by definition. Rank invariance and rank
similarity restrict the relationship between U (0) and U (1).
The stricter notion, rank invariance, means U (0) = U (1)
almost surely. It implies that individuals with the same
control outcome would have responded identically to treatment, as Doksum (1974) noted. While this is restrictive,
it is imposed by models with scalar outcome disturbances
(Newey & Powell, 2003; Chesher, 2005; Athey & Imbens,
2006; Chernozhukov et al., 2007).

87

A generalization of rank invariance that captures a similar notion is rank similarity, introduced by Chernozhukov
and Hansen (2005). Rank similarity with respect to S means
U (0) and U (1) are identically distributed conditional on
S = s for each s in the support of S. It implies that a subpopulation (defined by S = s) will have the same distribution
of ranks across treatment states. Rank similarity has meaning only with respect to some rank-shifting variable S, since
unconditionally U (0) and U (1) have identical distributions
by definition.
Figure 1 illustrates the concept of rank similarity graphically. The left panel shows that potential ranks have uniform
marginal distributions. The middle and right panels illustrate
that the conditional distribution of potential ranks may not
be uniform if S predicts ranks. The middle column shows
that under rank similarity, U (0) and U (1) are identically
distributed conditional on S, while the right panel shows
that when rank similarity is violated, the conditional distributions of U (0) and U (1) will differ. The rank-shifting
variable S plays a crucial role in the testability of this restriction; it obviates the need for knowledge of or assumptions
about the joint distribution of potential outcomes required
in prior work on treatment effect heterogeneity (Heckman
et al., 1997).
Rank similarity and, by extension, rank invariance impose
testable restrictions on observed data, provided the distributions of potential outcomes are identified. Intuitively, it
means that conditional on S, treatment status has no effect on
the distribution of ranks. The proposed test directly examines
this implication via the following procedure. First, estimate potential outcome CDFs F̂0 and F̂1 . Second, construct
sample ranks:
Ûi = (1 − Di ) F̂0 (Yi ) + Di F̂1 (Yi ) .

(1)

Third, estimate the following specification:
Ûi = α0 + α1 Di + Si α2 + Di Si δ + εi .

(2)

Finally, test the hypothesis H0 : δ = (0, · · · , 0) using the

−1 
h θ̂, where n is the sample
test statistic Δ̂ = nθ̂ h h V̂ h
size, θ̂ is an appropriate estimator (OLS, quantile regression,
or instrumental
 variables)
 for specification (2), h is the selection matrix 0q×q+2 , Iq , and V̂ is the estimated asymptotic
variance-covariance matrix of θ̂.
As shown below, under the null hypothesis of rank similarity, the test statistic converges asymptotically to a χ2 random
variable with q degrees of freedom. Since the Ûi s are constructed conditional on Di , they are normalized within each
treatment category. Therefore, α1 is not a free parameter in
regression (2), and so is not included in the test statistic.
Note that in the special case of a scalar rank shifter (q = 1),
this test is asymptotically equivalent to a standard t-test on
the interaction of Di and Si .
The regression-based procedure allows testing violations
of similarity for any feature of the rank distribution. To

88

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS
Figure 1.—Illustrative Distributions of Potential Ranks

Condional on S = s

Marginal

Rank Similarity Sasﬁed

Rank Similarity Violated

U(0)

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

U(1)

test for differences in the conditional expectation, estimate
equation (2) using mean regression or instrumental variables
estimators for average treatment effects. To test for differences in other parts of the distribution, estimate equation (2)
using quantile regression or instrumental quantile methods
for a range of quantile indices τ. In this way the proposed test
maintains power against any departure from rank similarity.1
The choice of estimators for F̂0 , F̂1 , and specification
(2) depends on the specific empirical setting. For exogenously assigned treatments, empirical CDFs and ordinary
least squares estimators suffice; settings with endogenous
treatments require instrumental variables methods.
First, consider the case where treatment is as good as
randomly assigned; that is, (Y (0) , Y (1)) are jointly independent of D. Under this condition, the marginal distributions of potential outcomes are identified by the conditional
empirical distribution functions:
n
1 (Yi ≤ y) (1 − Di )
F̂0 ( y) = i=1n
,
i=1 (1 − Di )
n
1 (Yi ≤ y) Di
.
F̂1 ( y) = i=1n
i=1 Di
Sample ranks Ûi are constructed from these estimators via
equation (1), and specification (2) can
−1 be estimated via

ordinary least squares, θ̂ = W
W
WÛ, or quantile


regression, θ̂ = arg min ni=1 ρτ Ûi − Wi θ , where W is a
θ


matrix of observations on Wi := 1 Di Si Di Si and ρτ is
the asymmetric loss “check” function.
Now suppose treatment status Di is possibly confounded,
but there exists an exogenous instrument Zi , for example,
1 Note that the testing procedure does not require equation (2) to correspond to a correctly specified conditional mean or conditional quantile
function. Least-squares and quantile regression estimators are well known to
converge to a population quantity that linearly approximates the underlying
conditional mean or quantile functions (White, 1980; Angrist, Chernozhukov, & Frenadez-Val, 2006). Under the null hypothesis of rank
similarity, those population quantities will be identical for U (0) and U (1).
The δ parameter in equation (2), which corresponds to the treatment-control
difference in those population quantities, will therefore be 0 even under
misspecification.

randomized treatment assignment. Let potential treatment
status as a function of the instrument be D (0) and D (1).
We assume the standard conditions for a valid instrument,
that (Y (0) , Y (1) , D (0) , D (1)) are jointly independent of
Z, and E [D|Z = 1] > E [D|Z = 0] . This condition and
the assumptions implicit in the potential outcomes notation
correspond to the usual exclusion and relevance conditions. Under this condition and rank similarity, the marginal
distributions of potential outcomes are identified (Chernozhukov & Hansen, 2005). If rank similarity is replaced
by a monotonicity condition on the response of treatment
status to the instrument, the marginal distributions of potential outcomes among the subpopulation that responds to the
instrument—compliers—are identified (Imbens & Angrist,
1994).
Implementing the test in a setting with an endogenous
treatment requires instrumental variables estimation of F̂0 ,
F̂1 , and regression specification (2). This can be done in
at least two ways, depending on which assumptions are
appropriate for the specific empirical setting. The first is
Chernozhukov and Hansen’s (2006) quantile instrumental
variables estimator. This approach is valid under the null
hypothesis of rank similarity and leads to a test of asymptotically correct size. The CDFs F1 and F0 can be estimated
by inverting estimates of the quantiles of Yi (1) and Yi (0)
obtained via Chernozhukov and Hansen’s (2006) instrumental variables quantile regression procedure. The resulting
estimates F̂1 and F̂0 then can be used to construct the sample ranks Ûi via equation (1). The
 test consistsof estimating

the effect of the vector Wi := 1 Di Si Di Si on Ûi using
Chernozhukov and Hansen (2006), which can be done for a
particular quantile (say, the median), or integrated over all
quantiles for the mean effect.
The second method is Abadie’s (2003) κ-weighted least
squares estimator, valid when treatment status can be
assumed to respond monotonically to the instrument almost
surely. A procedure based on this approach then tests rank
similarity among the subpopulation of compliers. Rank
invariance (and rank similarity as imposed in Chernozhukov
& Hansen, 2005) implies rank similarity among compliers,

TESTING RANK SIMILARITY

so a test based on this approach has asymptotically correct
size. Using this approach, the CDFs F1 and F0 can be estimated directly by weighted least-squares estimation of the
effect of Di on 1 (Yi ≤ y) Di (for F1 ( y)) and the effect of
(1 − Di ) on 1 (Yi ≤ y) (1 − Di ) (for F0 ( y)), using Abadie’s
κ as weights:
κi = 1 −

Di (1 − Zi )
(1 − Di ) Zi
−
.
Pr (Zi = 0) Pr (Zi = 1)

(3)

The resulting estimates F̂1 and F̂0 then can be used to construct the sample ranks Ûi via equation (1). The test is then
carried out by weighted regression of Ûi on the vector Wi .
III.

Asymptotic Theory

The limiting distribution of θ̂, and hence of the test
statistic

 Δ̂, depends in general on the first-step estimators
F̂0 , F̂1 , which can be viewed as infinite-dimensional nuisance parameters. The result here adopts the framework of
Newey (1994) for taking into account the first-step estimation in the final limiting distribution. The correction for the
first step consists of an adjustment term added to the limiting variance-covariance matrix, but the final estimator θ̂
continues to be consistent and asymptotically normal under
regularity conditions. The test statistic Δ̂, therefore, as a
quadratic form in an asymptotically normal estimator, converges to a χ2 random variable, as the following theorem
establishes.

Theorem
1. Let the vector of observed data be Ti =

P0 , where Wi :=
 joint distribution
Yi , Wi , Zi with



 . Suppose (i) F̂ , F̂
1 D i S i Di S i
0
1 are uniformly consistent
asymptotically
normal
estimators
(F0 , F1 ) such that

 for 

√ 
n F̂d ( y) − Fd ( y)  Gd 0, σd y, y for d ∈ {0, 1},
where G0 and G1 are independent gaussian processes,
and where  denotes uniform

 as a process
 convergence
indexed by y; (ii) θ̂ satisfies ni=1 m Ti , θ̂, F̂ /n = 0 with
∂
E [m (Ti , θ0 , F)] < ∞ and M := ∂θ
E [m (Ti , θ, F)] |θ=θ0
nonsingular; and (iii) assumptions A1 to A6 in the appendix are satisfied. Then the test statistic Δ̂ has the following
−1 

limiting distribution: Δ̂ = nθ̂ h h V̂ h
h θ̂ → χ2 (q),
d

where V̂ is a consistent estimator of V = M −1 ΩM −1 ,
and
matrix of
n Ω is the limiting variance-covariance
√
,
θ
,
F)
+
α
n,
and
α
/
is
defined
in the
(T
(T
(m
(T
))
)
i
0
i
i
i=1
appendix.
The result guarantees that the test will have asymptotically correct size. The test’s power derives from differences
in the conditional distribution of ranks across treatment states
under alternatives to rank similarity. If these differences lead
to shifts in the mean or other features of the distribution
captured in specification (2), then h θ will have nonzero elements. The power against fixed alternatives approaches 1 as
the sample size increases since the test statistic explodes.

89

The test also has nontrivial power against sequences of local
alternatives converging to the null of the form δ = γn−1/2 for
fixed γ. In this case, n−1/2 h θ̂ converges to a nonzero mean
joint normal N (γ, V ) and the test’s power is determined by
the corresponding noncentral chi square distribution.
Note that the limiting distribution in theorem 1 is derived
without assuming i.i.d. data, to accommodate applications
with clustered sampling or other dependence structures.
In Monte simulations in the online appendix, we examine the finite sample size and power of our test. Simulations
show that even for relatively small sample sizes, the test
maintains accurate size under both exogeneity and endogeneity and regardless of the degree of departure from the
null hypothesis of rank similarity. As expected, however, the
test becomes more powerful as the sample size grows and
the data-generating process deviates from the assumption of
rank similarity. The power of the test also depends heavily
on the degree of informativeness of the rank shifter, S, with
the power growing with the degree of correlation between
S and the outcome. Finally, in contexts with an endogenous
treatment, the power of the test also grows with the strength
of the instrument.
IV.

Empirical Example: Class Size and
Student Achievement

We test for rank similarity in the context of the Project
STAR class size reduction experiment. Starting in 1985, the
state of Tennessee randomized kindergarten students into
either small classes of 13 to 17 students or larger classes of
22 to 25 students. Given the importance of the question and
strength of the research design, data from this study have
been analyzed many times. These studies include work by
Finn and Achilles (1990), Word et al. (1990), and Krueger
(1999).
The treatment in our example is assignment to a small
class. We restrict our sample to students whose assignment
occurred in kindergarten and were still in the sample at the
end of first grade. There were 1,368 treated students and
3,040 control students. We examine math performance at
the end of first grade. On average, students assigned to the
smaller classes performed 0.20 standard deviations better
than students assigned to the larger classes. This positive
effect is statistically significant at the 1% level.
To test for rank similarity, we compute math performance
rank in both the treatment and control groups. We choose
eligibility for free lunch in kindergarten as our rank-shifting
variable, S. Figure 2 shows how the distribution of ranks in
the control distribution varies according to whether subjects
were eligible (lower income) or ineligible (higher income)
for free lunch. The density of ranks is shifted clearly to the
right for control subjects with higher family income relative
to subjects with lower family income.
We now examine the distributions of ranks in the treated
and control distributions for different values of our rank
shifter. In figure 3, we compare the distribution of ranks for

90

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS
Figure 2.—Histograms of Sample Ranks among Control Subjects
in the Tennessee STAR Class-Size Experiment

Table 1.—STAR Rank Similarity Test
Regressor

OLS Coefficient

Constant
Lower income
Treatment status
(Lower income) × (Treatment status)
Observations

0.605∗∗∗
(0.007)
−0.208∗∗∗
(0.010)
−0.024
(0.012)
0.054∗∗∗
(0.018)
4,408

Ordinary least squares estimates and robust standard errors of a regression of within-treatment rank on
the variables in the left-hand column. Significant at ***p < .01.

Lower income corresponds to eligibility for free or reduced-price lunch.

Figure 3.—Histograms of Sample Ranks among Students
Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch in the Tennessee
STAR Class-Size Experiment

the 1% level, suggesting that the rank disadvantage of being
from a low-income family is smaller in the treatment group
than in the control group. This test suggests that we should
reject the null hypothesis of rank similarity. Furthermore,
the test suggests that small class sizes were relatively more
advantageous for children from low-income families than
for children from higher-income families.
V.

Sample ranks are defined within treatment status.

treated and untreated subjects who had lower family income.
Under the null hypothesis of rank similarity, we expect the
rank distributions between treated and control observations
to be similar. Contrary to this expectation, we see that the
bottom of the distribution has less mass in the treatment
group relative to the control group. This suggests that treatment may have been more efficacious for struggling students
with low income than for struggling students with higher
income. This visual evidence suggests that the assumption
of rank similarity may be unfounded.
To test more formally for rank similarity and establish the
power of the rank shifter, we estimate regression specification (2) for within-treatment rank via ordinary least squares.
Table 1 shows the results of this estimation. We see that
the estimated coefficient on free lunch status is −0.208
and highly significant, suggesting that our rank shifter has
strong power. The estimated interaction between treatment
and free lunch status is 0.054 and statistically significant at

Conclusion

This paper proposed a test for rank invariance or rank
similarity in treatment effects. The test is based on standard
least squares or instrumental variables estimation methods
and applies to exogenous and endogenous treatments. The
test is consistent and simulations show it has good size and
power properties in finite samples.
An empirical example from a classroom intervention
shows that rank preservation deserves scrutiny in real-life
data. Rank similarity is rejected in test scores from the
Tennessee STAR class-size experiment.
The proposed test should prove useful in examining
the identification and interpretation of program evaluations,
clinical trials, and other treatment effect estimates. The procedure applies to binary treatments, but the framework can be
applied more generally. Specifying the test for multivalued
or continuous treatments is left to future research.
REFERENCES
Abadie, Alberto, “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of
Treatment Response Models,” Journal of Econometrics 113 (2003),
231–263.
Angrist, Joshua D., Victor Chernozhukov, and Ivan Fernandez-Val, “Quantile Regression under Misspecification, with an Application to the
U.S. Wage Structure,” Econometrica 74 (2006), 539–563.
Athey, Susan, and Guido Imbens, “Identification and Inference in Nonlinear Difference-in-Difference Models,” Econometrica 74 (2006),
431–497.
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes, “Distributional Impacts of the Self-Sufficiency Project,” NBER working
paper 11626 (2005).
Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, “An IV Model of Quantile
Treatment Effects,” Econometrica 73 (2005), 245–261.
Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, “Instrumental Quantile
Regression Inference for Structural and Treatment Effect Models,”
Journal of Econometrics 132 (2006), 491–525.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Guido W. Imbens, and Whitney K. Newey, “Instrumental Variable Estimation of Nonseparable Models,” Journal of
Econometrics 139 (2007), 4–14.

TESTING RANK SIMILARITY
Chesher, Andrew, “Nonparametric Identification under Discrete Variation,”
Econometrica 73 (2005), 1525–1550.
Cochrane, John H., “A Critique of the Application of Unit Root
Tests,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 15 (1991),
275–284.
Doksum, Kjell, “Empirical Probability Plots and Statistical Inference for
Nonlinear Models in the Two-Sample Case,” Annals of Statistics 2
(1974), 267–277.
Dong, Yingying, and Shu Shen, “Testing for Rank Invariance or Similarity
in Program Evaluation,” this review 100:1 (2018), 78–85.
Finn, Jeremy D., and Charles M. Achilles, “Answers and Questions
about Class Size: A Statewide Experiment,” American Educational
Research Journal 28 (1990), 557–577.
Frandsen, Brigham R., and Lars J. Lefgren, “Weak Stochastic Increasingness, Rank Exchangeability, and Partial Identification of
the Distribution of Treatment Effects,” unpublished manuscript
(2016).
Guggenberger, Patrik, “The Impact of a Hausman Pretest on the Asymptotic
Size of a Hypothesis Test,” Econometric Theory 26 (2010), 369–
382.
Heckman, James J., Jeffrey Smith, and Nancy Clements, “Making the Most
Out of Programme Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting

91

for Heterogeneity in Programme Impacts,” Review of Economic
Studies 64 (1997), 487–535.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist, “Identification and Estimation of
Local Average Treatment Effects,” Econometrica 62 (1994), 467–
475.
Krueger, Alan B., “Experimental Estimates of Education Production
Functions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1999), 497–532.
Newey, Whitney K., “The Asymptotic Variance of Semiparametric Estimators,” Econometrica 62 (1994), 1349–1382.
Newey, Whitney K., and James L. Powell, “Instrumental Variable Estimation of Nonparametric Models,” Econometrica 71 (2003), 1565–
1578.
White, Halbert, “Using Least Squares to Approximate Unknown Regression Functions,” International Economic Review 21 (1980),
149–170.
Word, Elizabeth, John Johnston, Helen Pate Bain, B. D. Fulton, Jayne Boyd
Zaharias, Charles M. Achilles, Martha Nannette Lintz, John Folger, and Carolyn Breda, “The State of Tennessee’s Student/Teacher
Achievement Ratio (Star) Project, technical report 1985–1990
(1990).
Wüthrich, Kaspar, “A Comparison of two Quantile Models with Endogeneity,” Diskussionsschriften dp1408 (2014).

