Adjusting for Nonignorable Drop-Out Using Semiparametric Nonresponse Models:
Comment
Author(s): D. A. Freedman
Source: Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 94, No. 448 (Dec., 1999), pp.
1121-1122
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of the American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2669924
Accessed: 21-10-2019 14:54 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of the American Statistical Association

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Comment
D. A. FREEDMAN

Inferences are often made from samples with substantial

Now

amounts of missing data. Scharfstein, Rotnitzky, and Robins

pb(A) P{X = 1 and Y c A}

(1999)-hereafter SRR-have substantially increased our
understanding of this important problem. In principle, of
course, missing data are just that-missing-and cannot be

P{X= l|Y}dP
'YeA

reconstructed after the fact. On the other hand, if covariates

are available and the censoring mechanism can successfully
be modeled or the missing data can be reasonably well pre-

JYA

dicted from observations, then progress can be made. Typ-

J (Y) dP by (3)

ically, identifying restrictions must be imposed; such as-

X [p dt + (Il-p) dv] by (4)

sumptions cannot usually be tested in any direct way. In

practice, restrictions that seem anodyne to one investigator may seem antic to another. For example, compare Belin

jp d,t+(l-p) j dv.

and Rolph (1994, pp. 489-490) with Freedman and Wachter
(1994, pp. 535-556); also see Copas and Li (1997), Manski
So

(1995), or Shaffer (1992).
In what follows, I try to state the issues quite sharply,

p X(I-0 dy =(1-p) X dv (5)

in a special case that is simple but gives the flavor of the

ideas in SRR. Let (X, Y) be a pair of random variables,
where X = 0 or 1 only, but Y is real valued; X and Y

and

may be dependent. Let p = P{X = 1} with 0 < p < 1.

,u=--v;

The idea is that Y can be observed if X = 1, but Y is

censored if X = 0. Many independent copies of (X, Y)

(6)

both distributions have the same null sets. Furthermore,

can be obtained, so p can be estimated very well, and

dv _ p 1- P e- p - (7)

so can

dy i-p q 1i-p

= L{YIX = 1}, (1)

Because v is a probability, ae is determined by the equation

where L stands for "law." The mystery is the law of Y,

e Pj= P 3Ye-iY(dy); (8)

given that Y is censored,

1p _00

v/ = L{YIX = 0}; (2)

the integral on the right must be finite. Thus v is

transform of p, (Feller 1971, p. 552).

v is not even identifiable.

Of course, (7) and (8) can be computed for

I assume that p and ,u are known; the problem is to say

In particular, /3-which describes the degree of selection
bias in the model-is not identifiable. Moreover, inferences

something about v. Among many other contributions, SRR
study a model where X depends on Y through a logistic

about the unobserved part of Y depend on 13. When 13 is

regression,

large and positive, the mass in v concentrates near the essen-

tial infimum of ,; when 13 is large and negative, the mass in
v concentrates near the essential supremum of M. That may

P{X 1 Y} = ocO(Y), (3)
where

seem paradoxical, but SRR have a good heuristic explana-

tion. Assumption (3) entails (6): Whatever is impossible for

exp(at + /3y)

the observed part of Y is also impossible for the unobserved

1 + exp(a + /3y)'

part. As SRR show, with other models even this conclusion
is false. SRR extend the simple framework described here

with exp x = ex. The model looks familiar, but appearances

can be deceptive. Suppose for a moment that 13 is given;to data structures with time-dependent covariates. Results
abbreviate 0 = 0q,. Then (3) determines a and v in termsare only a little less precise. When substantial amounts of
data are missing, the only analysis that matters is often the

of 13. Indeed,

sensitivity analysis.

L(Y) = pp + (I - p)v. (4)
? 1999 American Statistical Association
D. A. Freedman is Professor, Statistics Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720.

Journal of the American Statistical Association

December 1999, Vol. 94, No. 448, Theory and Methods
1121

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1122

Journal

of

the

American

Statistical

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Belin, T. R., and Rolph, J. E. (1994), "Can We Reach Consensus on Census
Adjustment?" with discussion, Statistical Science, 9, 486-508.

Copas, J. B., and Li, H. G. (1997), "Inference for Non-Random Samples,"
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Ser. B, 59, 55-77.

Feller, W. (1971), An Introduction to Probability Theoty and Its Applications, Vol. 2, (2nd. ed.), New York: Wiley.

Association,

December

1999

Freedman, D., and Wachter, K. (1994), "Heterogeneity and Census Adjustment for the Post-Censal Base" with discussion, Statistical Science,
9, 476-485, 527-537.

Manski, C. F. (1995), Identification Problems in the Social Sciences, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shaffer, J. P. (1992), The Role of Models in Nonexperimental Social Science: Two Debates, Washington, DC: American Educational Research
Association and American Statistical Association.

Comment
Jianqing FAN and Chunming ZHANG

Adjusting for nonignorable drop-out is an interesting and

not be validated scientifically. Things can be worse when

challenging topic in statistics that has significant impact on

political or emotional factors get involved in the selection

statistical decision and policy making. Because results can

of adjustment methods. These kinds of "adjustment biases"

be altered significantly by different assumptions on drop-

can be very severe in extreme cases. Thus model validation

out time, any conclusions based on adjustments should be

is very important for an adjustment method. A question then

drawn with care. Assumptions should be checked rigor-

arises whether one should adjust at all for drop-out biases

ously. Adjusting for nonignorable responses is arguably one

if no reliable method is available for modeling the drop-out

of the most debatable subjects in statistics. We welcome the

time.

opportunity to make a few comments.
Scharfstein, Rotnitzky, and Robins are to be congratu-

There are infinitely many possibilities for modeling dropout risk. To account for the nonignorable biases, it is as-

lated for this excellent article on adjusting for nonignor-

sumed that the drop-out risk follows the Cox proportional

able drop-out using semiparametric nonresponse models. It

hazards model. This assumption is the most important and

elegantly lays out a semiparametric framework and offers

most arguable one in the article. The adjustments are basi-

useful tools for sensitivity analyses. It provides insightful

cally reflections of this critical model assumption. One con-

and convenient models for assessing nonresponse biases. In

cern is that the model is not driven by any physical law, and

contrast with the missing-at-random assumption, this arti-

is not derived from conceivable intuitions. There is always

cle allows one to explore how conclusions can be affected

the risk that the model is misspecified. This possibility can-

if data are not missing at random.

not be rescued simply by considering a few other classes of

models, such as additive hazards models or other parametric
1. CAN DROP-OUT BIASES BE ADJUSTED FAIRLY?

This is a fair question one naturally asks. The answer depends on how well one can relate a response variable with

observable variables. To account for possible nonresponse
biases, an assumption on how subjects dropped out during a
study must be made. Without such a critical assumption, it
is not possible to assess the drop-out biases with reasonably

good accuracy. Indeed, to some extent, adjustments depend
purely on the assumptions on the drop-out process. Differ-

ent assumptions can result in completely different conclusions. This leads to final conclusions that are inevitably sub-

jective and disputable. The authors hinted repeatedly that

subject matter experts can be consulted on the choice of
models for the drop-out process. This is indeed very helpful
for ruling out some unrealistic models. However, chances

are that subject matter experts themselves cannot be certain

why drop-out occurs during a study and hence might not
feel comfortable with adjustments if such adjustments can-

forms r(t, ar0; V(T), Y). The sensitivity to model specifications make adjustment procedures debatable.
The article offers few clues as to why the Cox propor-

tional hazards model is chosen for modeling the risk of
drop-out. It would be very helpful if the authors elucidated
it. One speculation is that it is a convenient model for han-

dling censored data. But there are also some costs entailed
in using this model. One needs to evaluate the baseline haz-

ard function at study termination time T. The value T can

be in the tail region of the distribution of drop-out time
Q. This tail probability usually cannot be estimated reli-

ably. Further, the authors assume that the drop-out time Q
is continuously observable. If Q is observed only at a few

prescheduled time periods of clinical evaluation, then the

variable Q is censored. The entire statistical analysis can
be far more complicated than the current setting.
That the sensitivity of adjustments depends critically on

model assumption is convincingly demonstrated by the authors in their Figure 1. With a small change of assumption
on drop-out time done by varying a sensitivity parameter,

Jianqing Fan is Professor, Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095. Chunming Zhang is a graduate student,
Department of Statistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC

? 1999 American Statistical Association

27599. This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation

Journal of the American Statistical Association

grant DMS-9803200.

December 1999, Vol. 94, No. 448, Theory and Methods

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

