Journal of the American Statistical Association

ISSN: 0162-1459 (Print) 1537-274X (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uasa20

A Permutation Test for the Regression Kink Design
Peter Ganong & Simon Jäger
To cite this article: Peter Ganong & Simon Jäger (2018) A Permutation Test for the Regression
Kink Design, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113:522, 494-504, DOI:
10.1080/01621459.2017.1328356
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1328356

View supplementary material

Accepted author version posted online: 26
Jun 2017.
Published online: 11 Jun 2018.
Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 634

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uasa20

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION
, VOL. , NO. , –, Applications and Case Studies
https://doi.org/./..

A Permutation Test for the Regression Kink Design
Peter Ganonga,b and Simon Jägera,c,d,e,f
a
NBER, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA; b University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy, Chicago, IL; c Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Department of Economics, Cambridge, MA; d Institute on Behavior and Inequality (briq) Bonn, Germany; e IZA Institute of Labor
Economics, Bonn, Germany; f CESifo, Munich, Germany

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

The regression kink (RK) design is an increasingly popular empirical method for estimating causal effects of
policies, such as the effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment duration. Using simulation studies based on data from existing RK designs, we empirically document that the statistical significance of RK
estimators based on conventional standard errors can be spurious. In the simulations, false positives arise as
a consequence of nonlinearities in the underlying relationship between the outcome and the assignment
variable, confirming concerns about the misspecification bias of discontinuity estimators pointed out by
Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik. As a complement to standard RK inference, we propose that researchers
construct a distribution of placebo estimates in regions with and without a policy kink and use this distribution to gauge statistical significance. Under the assumption that the location of the kink point is random, this
permutation test has exact size in finite samples for testing a sharp null hypothesis of no effect of the policy on the outcome. We implement simulation studies based on existing RK applications that estimate the
effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment duration and show that our permutation test as well
as inference procedures proposed by Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik improve upon the size of standard
approaches, while having sufficient power to detect an effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment
duration. Supplementary materials for this article are available online.

Received June 
Accepted March 

1. Introduction
We develop a permutation test for Regression Kink (RK) designs
that rely on an identification principle analogous to the one
underlying the better-known Regression Discontinuity designs.
Regression Discontinuity designs estimate the change in the
level of an outcome Y at the threshold level of the assignment
variable V at which the level of the policy changes discontinuously (see, e.g., Thistlethwaite and Campbell 1960, Imbens and
Lemieux 2008). RK designs exploit discontinuous changes in the
slope of a policy B at a specific level of the assignment variable
and assess whether there is also a discontinuous change in the
slope of the outcome variable. By comparing the ratio of the slope
change in the outcome variable with the slope change in the policy variable at the kink point, the RK design recovers a causal
effect of the policy on the outcome at the kink point. This is again
analogous to RD designs that calculate the ratio of the change in
the level of the outcome to the change in the level of treatment
at the discontinuity. The slope change at the kink point identifies the average effect of increasing the policy conditional on the
level of the assignment variable at the kink point. Key identification and inference results for the RK design were derived in
Nielsen, Sørensen, and Taber (2010), Card, Lee, Pei and Weber
(2015b, CLPW in the following), Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014b, CCT in the following), and Calonico, Cattaneo, and
Farrell (2016).

Permutation test; Policy
discontinuities;
Randomization inference

This article discusses the proposed permutation test for the
RK design, its underlying assumptions and implementation.
For motivation, we begin by describing the RK design based on
an example from a growing body of literature that implements
the RK design to estimate the causal effect of unemployment
benefits B on an outcome Y such as unemployment duration
or employment (see, e.g., Britto 2015, CLPW; Card et al. 2015a;
Kyyrä and Pesola 2015; Landais 2015; Sovago 2015; Kolsrud,
Landais, Nilsson, and Spinnewijn 2015, KLNS in the following).
Despite being crucial for policy design, it is difficult to address
the question of whether unemployed individuals stay out of
work for longer if they receive more generous benefits in the
absence of a randomized experiment. RK studies of unemployment insurance aim to fill this gap by exploiting the fact
that many unemployment insurance systems pay out benefits
B that rise linearly with prior income V , up to a benefit cap B̄
for individuals earning above a reference income V̄ , the kink
point. In such a schedule, the slope of the policy variable B
with respect to the assignment variable V decreases discontinuously at V̄ . To study the effect of benefits B on unemployment
duration, researchers estimate the extent to which the slope
of the outcome variable Y —unemployment duration—with
respect to the assignment variable changes discontinuously at
such kink points. Intuitively, if unemployment benefits have no
impact on unemployment duration, one would not expect to see

CONTACT Simon Jäger
sjaeger@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA -.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/r/JASA.
Supplementary materials for this article are available online. Please go to www.tandfonline.com/r/JASA.
©  American Statistical Association

KEYWORDS

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

discontinuous changes in the slope of unemployment duration
Y and prior income V at a kink point V̄ . However, if unemployment benefits do deter individuals from finding employment,
one would expect discontinuous changes in the slope of unemployment duration with respect to prior income at kink points
that depend on the strength of the causal effect of benefits B on
unemployment duration Y . Section 2 provides a more detailed
review of the RK design and key identification results.
While the RK design has become increasingly popular, RK
estimators as typically implemented may suffer from nonnegligible misspecification bias and consequently incorrectly
centered confidence intervals (CCT). In most applications of the
RK design, researchers use local linear or quadratic estimators
to estimate the slope change at the kink and choose bandwidths
with the goal of minimizing mean squared error (Fan and
Gijbels 1996). Table A.1 in the Appendix provides an overview
of 44 RK studies, the vast majority of which use a linear or
quadratic specification. In these specifications, misspecification
bias can arise as a consequence of nonlinearity in the conditional
expectation function. To observe how, consider Figure 1, which
displays data-with a piecewise linear data-generating process
(DGP) featuring a kink and a quadratic DGP with no kink.
The top panel of Figure 1 shows that the estimated conditional
means from these two DGPs are visually indistinguishable.
However, applying local linear estimators that are common in
the RK literature to both DGPs indicates statistically highly
significant slope changes at the kink, even though the quadratic
DGP does not feature a discontinuous slope change. CCT show
that such misspecification bias is non-negligible with standard
bandwidth selectors and leads to poor empirical coverage of the
resulting confidence intervals. As a remedy, CCT develop an
alternative estimation and inference approach for RD and RK
designs based on a bias-correction of the estimators and a new
standard error estimator that reflects the bias correction.
To provide a complement and a robustness check to existing
RK inference, we propose a permutation test that treats the
location of the kink point V̄ as random and has exact size in
finite samples. The key assumption underlying our test is that
the location of the policy kink point is randomly drawn from
a set of potential kink locations. This assumption is rooted in
a thought experiment in which the data are taken as given and
only the location of the kink point V̄ is thought of as a random
variable with a known distribution. In many RK contexts,
this assumption is appealing because the kink point’s location
is typically not chosen based on features of the DGP and in
some cases—such as kinks in many unemployment insurance
schedules—is determined as the outcome of a stochastic process
(see Section 3). Under the null hypothesis that the policy has
no effect on the outcome and the assumption that the location
of the policy kink is randomly drawn from a specified support,
the distribution of placebo estimates provides an exact null
distribution for the test statistic at the policy kink. We prove
that the permutation test controls size exactly in finite samples.
We implement simulation studies to compare the size and
power of our permutation test to that of standard RK inference
as well as the RK estimators and confidence intervals developed in CCT. Specifically, we simulate data based on estimated
DGPs from existing RK applications aimed at estimating the
effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment duration

495

Figure . Piecewise linear and quadratic simulated DGPs. The data-generating process (DGP) is either linear with a kink (blue dots) or quadratic (red diamonds) without
a kink. We generate  observations with a variance of  and plot the data in bins
based on the approach in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (a, ). We estimate
a linear regression kink model with heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors. The
top panel shows the relationship between the outcome variable and the running
variable for both the piecewise linear and the quadratic DGP. In the middle panel,
we display the data for the piecewise linear DGP and add the estimates from a local
linear model. In the bottom panel, we display the data for the quadratic (no kink)
DGP and estimates from a local linear model.

in Austria and Sweden (Card et al. 2015b, Kolsrud et al. 2015).
These Monte Carlo simulations document that asymptotic
inference and standard bandwidth choice procedures (Fan and
Gijbels 1996) lead to over-rejection of the null hypothesis; RK
estimates are statistically significant using asymptotic methods
even when the kink is fact zero. Further simulation studies
show that asymptotic inference and standard bandwidth choice
procedures are particularly problematic—as evidenced by high
Type I error rates—when the relationship between outcome

496

P. GANONG AND S. JÄGER

and assignment variable is nonlinear. By contrast, CCT and
the permutation test maintain actual size close to nominal
size.
Following our analysis of size, we subsequently analyze
power. The simulation studies further reveal that both the permutation test and the estimator based on CCT have sufficient
power to reject the null hypothesis based on the effect sizes in
KLNS, that is, they reject the hypothesis that unemployment
benefits do not affect unemployment duration. In the simulation studies, we also document examples of settings in which the
permutation test fails to detect nonzero kinks. This can occur
when the relationship between the outcome and the assignment variable is sufficiently nonlinear relative to the magnitude of the kink. Overall, the simulation studies document that
there is a spectrum of estimators’ performance: standard asymptotic inference has much larger than nominal size, meaning
that it substantially over-rejects the null hypothesis, CCT has
closer to nominal size and lower power and the permutation test
yields exact nominal size but the lowest power compared to its
alternatives.
Our permutation test also serves as a complement to existing
inference methods for Regression Discontinuity (RD) designs.
Applying our procedure to simulated data based on two existing
RD applications shows that the permutation test has similar
size and power to existing RD methods. In particular, Cattaneo,
Frandsen, and Titiunik (2015) developed a randomization
inference approach for RD designs based on an interpretation
of RD designs as local randomized experiments in a narrow
window around the RD cutoff. While the procedure developed
by Cattaneo, Frandsen, and Titiunik (2015) treats the locations
of observations above and below the cutoff as random within a
narrow window and also proposes a method for the selection of
the window in which the randomization assumption holds, our
test offers a complementary approach by treating the location
of the kink point or cutoff itself as random.
By drawing on randomization inference, the permutation test
that we propose builds on a long tradition in the statistics literature (Fisher 1935; Lehmann and Stein 1949; Welch and Gutierrez 1988; Welch 1990; Rosenbaum 2001; Ho and Imai 2006,
see Rosenbaum 2002, for an introduction), which has recently
seen renewed interest among econometricians (see, for instance,
Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004; Imbens and Rosenbaum 2005; Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009; Abadie, Diamond,
and Hainmueller 2010; Abadie, Athey, Imbens, and Wooldridge
2014; Cattaneo, Frandsen, and Titiunik 2015). Our approach
generalizes a suggestion by Imbens and Lemieux (2008) for
the RD design—“testing for a zero effect in settings where it is
known that the effect should be 0”—to the RK design by estimating slope changes in regions where there is no change in the slope
of the policy. Engström et al. (2015) and Gelman and Imbens
(2014) pursued related placebo analyses. Our article builds on
CCT in developing new methods to deal with misspecification
bias in RK and RD designs. In related work, Landais (2015) proposed an alternative way of gauging the robustness in RK estimates by constructing difference-in-differences RK estimates
based on the same kink point, albeit using data from time periods with and without the presence of an actual policy kink. Ando
(forthcoming) uses Monte Carlo simulations to argue that linear

RK estimates are biased in the presence of plausible amounts of
curvature.

2. Notation and Review
2.1. Identification in the Regression Kink Design
The following section reviews key results and notation for the
RK design based on CLPW and CCT and illustrates the method
based on RK designs aimed at estimating the causal effect of
unemployment benefits B on an outcome Y unemployment
duration, by exploiting kinks in the unemployment insurance
schedule (see Britto 2015, Card et al. 2015a, CLPW, KLNS, Kyyrä
and Pesola 2015, Landais 2015, and Sovago 2015).
Formally, the outcome Y is modeled as
Y = y(B, V, U )

(1)

where B denotes the policy variable, V denotes a running variable, here thought of as prior income, which determines the
assignment of B, and U denotes an error term. Analogous to
treatment effects for binary treatments, defined as y(1, V, U ) −
y(0, V, U ) in a potential outcomes framework, the treatment
parameter that RK designs intend to estimate is the marginal
effect of increasing the level of the policy B on the outcome Y ,
that is,
dy(B, V, U )
.
dB

(2)

Integrating this marginal effect over the distribution of U conditional on B = b and V = v leads to the “treatment on the
treated” parameter in Florens, Heckman, Meghir, and Vytlacil
(2008):

∂y(b, v, u)
dFU |B=b,V =v (u)
(3)
T TB=b,V =v =
∂b
where FU |B=b,V =v denotes the conditional c.d.f. of the error term
U . In the context of unemployment benefits, this corresponds to
the average effect of marginally increasing unemployment benefits on unemployment duration for individuals with unemployment benefits B = b and prior income V = v.
The key feature that RK designs exploit is a discrete slope
change in the assignment mechanism of the policy. Let
B = b(V ) denote the continuous policy function. In many
unemployment systems, benefits B rise linearly with the prior
income V that an individual earned before becoming unemployed. A maximum level of benefits is typically offered for
individuals earning above a higher reference income V̄ . A
minimum floor on benefits is also typically offered for individuals with reference income below some minimum threshold.
The existence of a benefit maximum implies that the slope
between the policy variable B (unemployment benefits) and the
assignment variable V (prior income) changes discontinuously
at V̄ when the prior income rises above the reference income.
To illustrate an example of a kink at which the slope of the
benefit schedule increases discretely around a minimum benefit
floor, the top panel of Figure 2 shows plots of unemployment
benefits plotted against earnings in the previous year based
on Austrian UI data (CLPW). The benefit schedule or policy

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

497

the previous year, again based on Austrian UI data (CLPW) and
documents an apparent slope change at the kink point.
2.2. Estimation and Identification
The RK estimand, τRK , is defined in the population as the change
in the slope of the outcome variable at the kink point normalized
by the slope change in the policy at the kink point:
τRK ≡

limv↓V̄ dE(Y |V = v )/dv − limv↑V̄ dE(Y |V = v )/dv
limv↓V̄ db(v )/dv − limv↑V̄ db(v )/dv

. (5)

In the example of unemployment benefits, the denominator
of this expression—that is, the slope change in the policy variable
at the reference income—corresponds to limv↓V̄ db(v )/dv −
limv↑V̄ db(v )/dv = α2 − α1 . This is analogous to the denominator in fuzzy RD designs, which scales up the difference in the
level of the outcome variable at the discontinuity by the difference in the level of the treatment at the discontinuity.
CLPW prove that the RK estimand in (5) identifies the “treatment on the treated” parameter in (3) (Florens et al. 2008) for
individuals at the kink point under mild regularity conditions,
in particular an assumption of smoothness of y, so that

∂y(b, v, u)
dFU |B=b,V =V (u).
(6)
τRK =
∂b

Figure . RK Example: UI Beneﬁts in Austria. Notes: the ﬁgures are based on Card
et al. (b). T-min refers to the earnings threshold at which beneﬁts start to rise. Bin
number chosen based on the approach by Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (a,
).

function B = b(V ) can be simply described as follows:

∂b(V )
α , v < V̄
= 1
,
α2 , V̄ < v
∂v

(4)

where α1 = α2 and limv↑V̄ db(v )/dv = α1 and limv↓V̄ db(v )/
dv = α2 . In this example, the researchers analyze a location V̄
at which the slope of unemployment benefits B with respect to
prior income V rises discontinuously, that is, α1 < α2 .
Researchers can exploit the discrete change in the policy
function b(V ) at the kink point to identify the marginal effect of
the policy. Intuitively, if unemployment benefits have no impact
on unemployment duration, one would not expect to see discontinuous changes in the slope of unemployment duration and
prior income at kink points. However, if unemployment benefits do deter individuals from going back to work, then one
would expect discontinuous changes in the slope of unemployment duration with respect to prior income at kink points. At
the kink, one would expect a positive slope change as individuals above the reference income receive more generous benefits and consequently stay unemployed for longer. To study the
effect of benefits B on unemployment duration, researchers can
then estimate the extent to which the slope of the outcome variable Y —unemployment duration—with respect to the assignment variable changes discontinuously at such kink points. To
illustrate, the bottom panel in Figure 2 plots a measure of unemployment duration Y against the running variable V , earnings in

Local polynomial regression techniques are used for estimation of τRK (Fan and Gijbels 1996). The data are split into two
subsamples to the left and right of the kink point (denoted by
+ and −, respectively) and a local polynomial regression is estimated separately for each subsample. For the sharp RK design,
in which the slope change in the policy at the kink point—
normalized to V̄ = 0 in the following—is known, this amounts
to solving the following least squares problem in the sample:

2
N−
p

 − j

V−
−
−
β̃
V
−
K hi
Y
min
i
j
i
−
{β j }

i=1
+

min
+
{β j }

N


j=0


Yi+ −

i=1

p

j=0

 + j
β̃ +
j Vi

2

K

Vi+
h

subject to β̃0− = β̃0+
p

τ̂RK ≡

β̃1+ − β̃1− /(α2 − α1 ).

(7)

Here, p denotes the order of the polynomial, K the kernel function, and h the bandwidth used for estimation. In the literature,
the bandwidth is typically chosen based on the formula in Fan
and Gijbels or the procedure in CCT. The numerator of the lefthand side of equation (7) is identified as β̂1+ − β̂1− . The papers in
the RK literature have primarily adopted a uniform kernel as the
choice of K and overwhelmingly use local linear and quadratic
specifications.
2.3. Asymptotic Bias
A potential problem of RK designs is that nonlinearities of the
conditional expectation function E[Y |V = v] can generate bias
P
in the estimator τ̂RK
. Panel 3 of Figure 1 illustrates the intuition
for this result as curvature of the conditional expectation function generates bias of linear RK estimators. A formal argument

498

P. GANONG AND S. JÄGER

supporting this intuition follows from CCT who derive a general
formula for the asymptotic bias of RK and RD estimators. Based
on the general formula, the asymptotic misspecification bias of
(2)
(2)
+ m−
)h,
local linear RK estimators is proportional to (m+
( j)
( j)
where h is the bandwidth and the terms m+ and m− denote the
limits of the jth derivative of m(v ) ≡ E[Y |V = v] from above
and below at the kink. A similar expression can be derived for
local quadratic estimators for which first-order bias is proportional to third-order terms of the conditional mean function.
CCT prove that such misspecification bias is non-negligible with
standard bandwidth selectors and thus leads to poor empirical
coverage of the resulting confidence intervals.

3. A Permutation Test for the Regression Kink Design
3.1. The Thought Experiment
We propose a simple permutation test to assess the null hypothesis that treatment has no effect on the outcome of interest. At
the core of our test is the assumption that the location of the policy kink can be considered as randomly drawn from a known
set of placebo kink points. This assumption needs to be evaluated in the context of the specific research design under scrutiny.
We describe a method for how researchers can estimate a distribution of placebo kink points in the context of unemployment
insurance systems. In this interval, we can reassign the location
p
of the kink and calculate RK estimates, τ̂RK , at these placebo
kinks. The permutation test assesses the extremeness of the estimated change in the slope at the kink point relative to estimated
slope changes at nonkink points under the null hypothesis that
the policy does not affect the outcome.
The thought experiment underlying this permutation test
and randomization inference more generally is different from
the one underlying asymptotic inference. The idea underlying
asymptotic inference is one of sampling observations from a
large population. In contrast, the thought experiment in randomization inference is based on a fixed population that the
researcher observes in the data, with the realizations of the running variable v and the outcome variable y, in which the assignment of treatment is sampled repeatedly. In the latter approach,
treatment assignment is thought of as the random variable. Our
test therefore does not treat the sample as being drawn from a
(super) population for which we seek inference but rather takes
the observed sample as given and tests hypotheses regarding this
particular sample, treating the location of the policy kink as a
random variable.
3.2. The Permutation Test Statistic
This subsection introduces the reduced form RK estimator as
the test statistic for the permutation test, which can be easily
adjusted to correspond to researchers’ modeling choices in a
given RK application. We let y denote the vector of yi values, v
denote the vector of v i realizations and k denote a potential kink
point, with a policy kink featuring a discontinuous slope change
in the policy or a placebo kink not featuring such a discontinuous slope change. The data are a vector of n observations
each with (yi , v i , b(v i )) denoting outcome, running variable,
and policy variable: in the context of using the RK design to
estimate the effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment

duration, these would correspond to unemployment duration,
prior income, and unemployment benefits, respectively.
For notational tractability and expositional clarity, our exposition pertains to the linear RK model with a uniform kernel.
This can be easily generalized to higher-order polynomials and
other kernels. Define the matrix
vk ≡ ṽ(k)
⎛
1 (v 1 − k)
⎜ ..
..
≡⎝.
.
1 (v n − k)

⎞

(8)

(v 1 − k)1(v 1 ≥ k)
⎟
..
⎠.
.

(v n − k)1(v n ≥ k)

We define the test statistic for the slope change at the potential
kink point k as
T (v, y, k) ≡ ( 0 0 1) (vk  vk )−1 vk  y,
|v i − k| ≤ h(v, y, k),

(9)

where h(v, y, k) denotes the bandwidth used for estimation.
This test statistic corresponds to the reduced form of a linear RK estimator. At the true kink point, which we label k∗ ,
this estimator—scaled up by the slope change at the policy—
identifies the causal effect of the policy on the “treated,”
 ∂y(b,v,u)
dFU |B=b(k∗ ),V =k∗ , (u), under the assumptions laid out
∂b
in CLPW. We can calculate the test statistic T (v, y, k) at the
true policy kink point k∗ , T (v, y, k∗ ), and at other points k ∈
[v min , v max ] in the range of v.
Modeling choices. The test statistic used for the permutation
test should correspond to the RK estimator and preferred modeling choices, including bandwidth (or a bandwidth selection
mechanism), polynomial order, and bias correction using the
approach developed by CCT, implemented by the researcher for
the RK estimator at the actual policy kink. The permutation
test approach can be easily generalized to incorporate alternative RK estimators, polynomial orders, and bandwidth choices.
It also can be easily applied to a Regression Discontinuity application (see Section 5). The Monte Carlo studies that we present
in Section 4 provide some guidance for the modeling choices
and suggest that estimators based on the procedure in CCT perform relatively well compared to local polynomial estimators
with bandwidth choice based on Fan and Gijbels (1996).
3.3. The Randomization Assumption
The core assumption underlying our permutation test is that the
location of the policy kink point k∗ can be thought of as being
randomly drawn:
Assumption: Random Kink Placement. k∗ is a realization
of a random variable K distributed according to a known
distribution P.
The assumption that the policy kink location can be thought
of as being randomly drawn is a strong but natural one in
the context of many RK designs. It would be violated if, for
instance, policy-makers had chosen a kink location explicitly or implicitly in response to the shape of the conditional
expectation function E[Y |V ], for example, at a location where
curvature is particularly high or low. For example, the KLNS
study an example where the benefit cap was raised beginning in

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

2001. If policy-makers raised the cap specifically because they
observed curvature in unemployment duration near the policy
kink, this would contaminate this analysis. However, the institutional setup in KLNS makes this type of violation unlikely.
We discuss four implementable strategies for researchers to
identify P.
1. Estimation of stochastic process based on institutional
features. In the example of estimating the causal effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment duration, researchers
implementing the permutation test for the RK design can exploit
features of many unemployment insurance systems to directly
estimate the distribution P. In many unemployment insurance
systems, the location of the kink point at which benefits are
capped is determined as a consequence of past aggregate wage
growth in the economy. For instance, in Austria—the setting of
the study by CLPW—the earnings ceiling in the unemployment
insurance system changes as a function of aggregate wage
growth from the third to the second previous calendar year
(§ 108 Allgemeines Sozialversicherungsgesetz). Therefore, data
on past wage growth can be used to directly estimate the properties of the stochastic process that determines the realization of
k∗ in a given year or researchers can directly use the distribution
of past changes in the location of the kink point as a set of
potential kink locations for implementing the permutation test.
In Section 4, we describe how we draw from the distribution
of realized kink location changes in the context of the Austrian
unemployment insurance system.
If directly estimating the stochastic process determining k∗
is infeasible, then there is a class of alternative selection mechanisms involving a discretized set of kinks on range [v, v̄].
2. Documentary evidence on rule-making. Researchers can
still proxy P by drawing on information on the institutional environment of the relevant RK application. In the spirit of randomization inference, P can correspond to a grid of points spanning
the range of proposals for kinks that could have been adopted.
For example, if several policy proposals existed in a political
debate regarding the choice of a reference income V̄ in the example of unemployment insurance we discussed, researchers could
use the discretized range [v, v] that includes all of these proposals. For instance, prior to switching to a system of automatic
updates of the earnings ceiling based on aggregate wage growth
in 1969, the German Bundestag adjusted the earnings ceiling in a
discretionary fashion so that the minutes of plenary proceedings
can be used to gauge the range of discussed proposals.
3. Local randomization neighborhood (Cattaneo, Frandsen,
and Titiunik 2015). In the context of developing a randomization inference approach for the RD design treating observations
as randomly assigned, Cattaneo, Frandsen, and Titiunik (2015)
designed a data-driven procedure to select a window around
an RD cutoff based on balance tests of pre-treatment covariates in which treatment status is arguably as good as randomly
assigned. A natural extension of their procedure is to treat the
location of the cutoff or kink as randomly assigned within this
window.
4. Range of available data. As a final benchmark, we suggest
that researchers consider the whole range of available data
[v min , v max ] and treat the empirical distribution of V as the
distribution for P. This follows the approach in Section 4 of
Gelman and Imbens (2014) for selecting pseudo-thresholds in
the context of evaluating RD designs. This approach is natural in

499

the context of using the RK design to estimate the causal effect
of unemployment benefits on unemployment duration, because
there are a wide range of policy kink locations in practice. For
example, the maximum weekly UI benefit is a direct function
of prior income varies across US states from $235 to $698.

3.4. Exact Size For Testing the Null Hypothesis of Policy
Irrelevance
The goal of our permutation test is to assess whether the data
reject the null hypothesis that the policy does not affect outcomes. We formalize this as a sharp null hypothesis where B
and V denote the range of the policy and assignment variable,
respectively:
Null Hypothesis: Policy Irrelevance. The policy does not affect
)
= 0, ∀b ∈ B, ∀v ∈ V.
outcomes at any v: dy(b,v,U
db
Note that this hypothesis implies that the policy is irrelevant,
that is, y(b1 , ṽ, U ) = y(b2 , ṽ, U ), ∀b1 , b2 ∈ B, ∀ṽ ∈ V. Under
the Policy Irrelevance Hypothesis and the Assumption of Random
Kink Placement, the distribution of kink estimates over P corresponds to the exact distribution of possible estimates that could
have arisen had the policy kink been at a different location in
the same dataset. Under these assumptions, we can construct an
exact test following the logic of Fisher (1935) and Pitman (1937).
Note that the null hypothesis of policy irrelevance across the
distribution of potential kink points V is stronger than the null
hypothesis in Cattaneo, Frandsen, and Titiunik (2015) and Cattaneo, Titiunik, and Vazquez-Bare (forthcoming), who assume
policy irrelevance in a local region around the discontinuity.
Proposition 1. Under the Null Hypothesis of Policy Irrelevance and the Random Kink Location assumption, there exists a
test function φ(v, y, k) for significance level α that has an exact
finite sample level of α.
In Appendix B, we follow the structure of a simple proof by
Romano (1990) documenting that under the Null Hypothesis of
Policy Irrelevance and the Random Kink Location assumption
there exists a test function φ(v, y, k) for significance level α that
has an exact finite sample level of α.
Under the assumption of random kink placement, the null
hypothesis thus leads to a testable implication that can be
assessed by measuring how unusual a given realization of the
test statistic is at the policy kink. Analogous to the test outlined
above, researchers can also calculate p-values for assessing the
likelihood that the null hypothesis is true given the RK estimate at the policy kink k∗ and the distribution of placebo kink
estimates. Suppose a researcher had calculated 1000 placebo
kink estimates and the estimate at the policy kink k∗ was the
20th lowest of these estimates. Subsequently, the two-sided pvalue would be calculated to be 4% corresponding to twice
the one-sided p-value of 2%. More generally, the two-sided pvalue can be calculated as twice the minimum of the two onesided p-values, that is, the minimum of the fraction of placebo
estimates—including the one at the actual policy kink k∗ —that
are no greater than or no smaller than the test statistic at the
policy kink k∗ .

500

P. GANONG AND S. JÄGER

3.5. Confidence Intervals
We also construct confidence intervals by inverting the permutation test following Rosenbaum (2002, chap. 2.6.2) and Imbens
and Rubin (2015, chap. 5.7). The confidence interval is defined
as the region of potential constant treatments effects for which
the permutation test does not reject the null hypothesis of policy
irrelevance when applied to the transformed data. We transform
the data by subtracting out a set of potential treatment effects
and then apply the permutation test to the transformed data.
Appendix C provides details on the algorithm that we implement for identifying confidence intervals.

4. Applications of the Permutation Test
4.1. The Effect of Unemployment Benefits on Duration:
Simulation Studies Comparing Asymptotic and
Randomization Inference
We simulate data based on two existing RK applications estimating the effect of unemployment insurance on unemployment
duration, namely CLPW and KLNS. The simulation studies
compare the size and power of asymptotic inference and the permutation test for linear, quadratic, and cubic estimators based on
FG and CCT bandwidth choice. The simulations reveal a tradeoff between size and power among inference procedures: FG
bandwidth choice has high power but size well above nominal
levels, while CCT and the permutation test have much improved
size but have the power to reject the null hypothesis only in the
KLNS setting and not in the CLPW setting.
... Simulation Procedure and Methods
Our data simulation procedure has two steps. In a first step, we
estimate cubic spline models on binned means of data given to
us by the authors of the respective papers. The running variable
in both applications corresponds to measures of prior income
and the outcome variable to a measure of unemployment duration. The top panel of Figure 3 shows data that CLPW provided
to us, outlining the relationship between log unemployment
duration and base year earnings at the bottom kink for 100
nonoverlapping bins. Similarly, the bottom panel of Figure 3
shows the relationship between unemployment duration and
the running variable for the application in KLNS. We use a cubic
spline model as approximation to the DGP because it offers a
very flexible approximation of the conditional mean function
with only one additional parameter per knot. We estimate two
cubic spline models on each dataset: one with a cubic spline that
assumes there is no discontinuous slope change to evaluate size
and again with a modified cubic spline that allows for a discontinuous slope change at the policy kink to evaluate power. In all
cases, we use a spline with 100 equally spaced knots covering
the full support of the running variable. To illustrate, the solid
maroon lines in both panels of Figure 3 show the estimated
conditional mean function in both applications using a cubic
spline without allowing for a slope change at the kink point,
while the dashed maroon lines show a cubic spline fit allowing
for discontinuous slope changes at the kink point. In a second
step, we simulate KLNS datasets and CLPW datasets, each
with 10,000 unemployment durations where y = E(y|x) + ε

Figure . Conditional mean functions for RK applications in Card et al. (b) and
Kolsrud et al. (). The data showing the global relationship between the outcome
variable and the running variable were shared with the authors by Andrea Weber
and Camille Landais. The solid maroon line denotes the ﬁt for a natural cubic spline
estimated on the data without allowing for a slope change at the kink point; the
dashed maroon line denotes a natural cubic spline allowing for a slope change at
the kink point.

and ε ∼ N(0, 0.125). We report results from 200 simulated
datasets for FG and 50 simulated datasets for CCT in Table 1.
We implement a higher number of simulations for FG due to
the increased dispersion of estimates based on FG bandwidth
choice relative to CCT and because of the higher computational
burden of CCT’s methodology.
To assess size, we implement the permutation test described
in Section 3 and asymptotic inference in datasets that were generated under the assumption that the null hypothesis is true. The
kink locations span the feasible range of the running variable
and we consider a grid of 100 equally spaced placebo kinks. The
proof in Appendix B discusses how to handle ties. In every simulated dataset, we treat every kink as a policy kink, meaning that
we implement the permutation test and asymptotic inference at
each of the 100 placebo kinks. We set the nominal level of the
test to 5% for both inference methodologies and reject the null
hypothesis if the 95% asymptotic confidence interval excludes
zero. We compute the asymptotic Type I error rate as the fraction of times that the null hypothesis is rejected.
... Results
When the null hypothesis is true, asymptotic inference with FG
bandwidth choice has size far exceeding nominal levels, while

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

501

Table . Empirical study: regression kink estimators.
Estimate

Interval Length

Error Rate

Data

Kink?

Method

Mean

SD

Asymp

Permute

Error Type

Asymp

Permute

CLPW
CLPW
KLNS
KLNS
CLPW
CLPW
KLNS
KLNS

No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT

.
−.
.
.
.
.
− .
− .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Type I (Size)
Type I (Size)
Type I (Size)
Type I (Size)
Type II ( - Power)
Type II ( - Power)
Type II ( - Power)
Type II ( - Power)

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

NOTES: To compare the false rejection rate (size) and false acceptance rate (power) of asymptotic and permutation-based methods, we analyze data from two empirical
applications which compute the elasticity of unemployment duration with respect to beneﬁts: CLPW () and KLNS (). We ﬁt a natural cubic spline to each dataset.
To estimate the Type I error rate, we assume no kink (rows –), and require that the ﬁrst derivative is continuous at all of the knots. To estimate the Type II error rate (rows
–), we allow the ﬁrst derivative to change discontinuously at the policy kink. We randomly generate , unemployment durations y = E (y|x) + ε with E (y|x) from
the cubic spline and ε ∼ N(0, 0.125). For ease of exposition, we have scaled up the outcome variable by 105 for CLPW and by 102 for KLNS. FG uses a local linear estimator
with Fan and Gijbels’s () bandwidth, while CCT uses Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik’s (b) local linear estimator with quadratic bias-correction. We set the nominal
level of the test to %. We reject the null hypothesis when the estimate at the kink location is outside the % conﬁdence interval, where the interval is constructed either
using standard asymptotic methods or the permutation method described in Section  for a set of placebo kinks on [−, ] for CLPW and [−, ] for KLNS.
We use one draw of the dataset per simulation draw and  placebo kinks to estimate the Type I error rate. Reported results are based on  (FG) and  (CCT) draws
for each speciﬁcation.

CCT’s procedure and the permutation test are reliable, as documented in Table 1. To evaluate size, we report the Type I error
rate, which is the fraction of placebo kinks where each methodology rejects the null hypothesis at the 5% level. Linear estimators with FG bandwidth choice have substantially higher than
nominal coverage rates, close to 40%, demonstrating a failure
of asymptotic inference for these modeling choices. This failure arises because the procedure cannot distinguish between the
global “U-shape” in the CLPW data-generating process and a
discrete change in slope at the policy kink. In contrast, estimators following CCT’s procedure perform substantially better and
lead to Type I error rates much closer to the nominal level. The
Type I error rate of the permutation test corresponds to the nominal level of 5% as proven in Proposition 1.
In the context of these two empirical applications, the permutation test produces longer confidence intervals precisely when
asymptotic methods over-reject the null hypothesis. We construct asymptotic interval length using standard methods and
permutation interval length using the methodology described
in Section 3.5 and Appendix C following Rosenbaum (2002,
chap. 2.6.2) and Imbens and Rubin (2015, chap. 5.7). The interval lengths based on the permutation test are substantially larger
than the asymptotic ones in the case of FG bandwidth choice,
in particular in the case of CLPW, where intervals based on the
permutation test are two orders of magnitude larger than the
asymptotic ones. In contrast, permutation-test based confidence
intervals following CCT’s procedure tend to be larger, in three of
four specifications, but of a similar order of magnitude as asymptotic confidence intervals based on CCT.
To assess power, we implement the permutation test and
asymptotic inference in datasets that were generated under
the assumption that the null hypothesis is false, specifically by
assuming that there is a slope change in the DGP at the policy
kink. We use the same grid as in our analysis of size and again
set the nominal level of the test to 5%. We analyze the Type II
error rate, which is defined as the fraction of times, where the
null hypothesis is rejected when there is a true policy kink.
When the null hypothesis is false, Table 1 shows that
asymptotic inference with FG bandwidth choice consistently
rejects the null hypothesis, while CCT’s procedure and the

permutation test rejects the null hypothesis in only one of two
empirical applications. For CLPW, the error rate is 12% when the
FG bandwidth procedure is used; in contrast, CCT and the permutation test fail to reject 92% and 73% of the time, respectively.
For KLNS, the error rate is zero across all procedures, that is, the
null hypothesis is rejected each time. This shows that asymptotic
inference with FG bandwidth choice has high power in both settings, while CCT and the permutation test only have sufficient
power in one of the settings. The permutation test delivers different conclusions in these two settings due to the differing shapes
of the conditional mean functions. The estimated slope changes
in CLPW away from the policy kink tend to be positive, just
like the change at the true policy kink. In contrast, in KLNS, the
slope change at the policy kink is negative, while the estimated
slope changes away from the policy kink tend to be zero or
positive.
We also assess the performance of quadratic and cubic specifications and find that standard inference achieves lower type I
and higher Type II error rates as the order of the local polynomial model increases. Table A.2 in the Appendix demonstrates
qualitatively similar results for quadratic specifications, while
Table A.3 demonstrates that cubic specifications with standard
inference also have lower Type I error rates. In addition, we also
implement the permutation test by drawing on information on
the institutional environment and using the past realization of
changes in the earnings ceiling as described in Table A.4 in the
Appendix and proposed in Section 3.3. Similar to the previous
specifications, the results in Table A.4 illustrate that the permutation test achieves exact size, albeit with higher Type II error
rates than standard procedures.
Taken together, the results show that linear and quadratic
estimators with FG bandwidth choice over-reject the null
hypothesis in data simulated based on actual RK applications.
Our results show a trade-off between size and power across
inference methods. Unlike asymptotic FG methods, CCT’s
estimator as well as permutation test-based inference lead to
Type I error rates closer to the nominal level. However, CCT
and the permutation test have sufficient power to detect an
effect of unemployment benefits on unemployment duration in
only one of the two empirical applications.

502

P. GANONG AND S. JÄGER

4.2. Comparing Standard and Randomization Inference:
Additional Simulation Studies
To further understand where our approach has power, we
extend the analysis to three artificial data-generating processes
(DGPs). The conditional mean functions for the linear and
nonlinear DGPs that we analyze are displayed in Figure A.1 in
the Appendix. For each of these conditional mean functions,
we simulate data with and without a kink at zero analogous
to the procedure in the previous section and report the same
set of statistics as in Table 1 to study size and power. DGP 1
is a linear function and piecewise linear in the specification
with a kink. DGP 2 is based on a combination of trigonometric
polynomial and exponential functions with and without kinks.
DGP 3 follows a sine function. The simulations show that there
is a spectrum where asymptotic inference using FG bandwidth
substantially over-rejects and CCT has closer to nominal size
but lower power and the permutation test has size close to
nominal levels but lowest power. In general, the power of RK
estimators is lowest when the DGP is highly nonlinear relative
to the effect size studied.
We implement simulation procedures analogous to those
described in Section 4.1. Specifically, we study a grid of 100
equally spaced placebo kinks on the interval [−1,1] and analyze 200 simulated datasets using the FG methodology and 50
simulated datasets using the CCT methodology for computational reasons and due to the higher dispersion of FG estimates.
The only modification is that while in the real datasets there was
exactly one location for the policy kink—that is, the actual policy
kink in the applications in CLPW and KLNS—in our simulated
datasets we consider a grid of equally spaced locations for the
policy kink in our analysis of the Type II error rate.
Table 2 reports the Type I error rate of linear RK estimators under asymptotic and permutation test-based inference. In
line with the previous section, the results document that asymptotic inference with FG bandwidth choice leads to substantial
overrejection of the null hypothesis—Type I error rates greater
than 50%—when the DGP features nonlinearity (DGPs 2 and
3), while it performs well when the DGP is linear—in the case
of DGP 1—with a Type I error rate of 5%. Asymptotic inference based on CCT’s procedure outperforms the estimator with
FG bandwidth, but leads to overrejection of the null hypothesis in some settings with nonlinearity (DGPs 2 and 3). Inference
based on the permutation test achieves Type I error rates at the
nominal level of the test by construction. In Appendix Tables

A.5 and A.3, we repeat the exercise for the case of quadratic and
cubic RK estimators. The relative performance of these estimators with asymptotic inference does not improve relative to the
case of linear RK estimators. Again, the permutation test leads
to empirical coverage at the nominal level.
Table 3 reports the Type II error rate of linear RK estimators under asymptotic and permutation test-based inference for
slope changes of 5 and 20 at the kink point and shows that
the permutation test suffers from lower power for highly nonlinear DGPs. Asymptotic inference with RK estimators relying
on the bandwidth choice procedure in FG leads to the lowest
Type II error rates and has small interval lengths compared to
asymptotic inference based on CCT as well as the permutation
test. Nonetheless, comparing the mean of the estimates across
specifications reveals that CCT’s estimator is much less biased,
in particular in the case of DGP 3, which is highly nonlinear.
The results also suggest that the power of the permutation test
is particularly low when the DGP is very nonlinear. Curvature
makes the implementation of the RK design particularly problematic due to misspecification bias, as discussed in Section 2.3
and pointed out by CCT. In the case of highly nonlinear DGPs,
point estimates are also much more dispersed as indicated by the
standard deviation and longer intervals for the permutation test.
In Appendix Tables A.6 and A.3 (last six rows), we also report
results for the case of quadratic and cubic estimators.

5. Applying the Permutation Test to Existing RD
Applications
In this setting, we briefly document results of applying the permutation test to RD designs based on two well-known studies by
Lee (2008) and Ludwig et al. (2007) and illustrate that standard
asymptotic inference and the permutation test deliver similar
conclusions in the RD setting. We display the conditional mean
functions in Figure A.2 in the Appendix. To apply our analysis
to an RD setting, we modify equations (8) and (9) to allow for
an intercept shift at the discontinuity:
⎛

1 1(v 1 ≥ k)
⎜ ..
..
k
v ≡⎝.
.
1 1(v 1 ≥ k)
T (v, y, k) ≡ ( 0

1

⎞
(v 1 − k)1(v 1 ≥ k)
⎟
..
⎠
.
(v n − k) (v n − k)1(v n ≥ k)
(10)
k  k −1 k 

0 0) (v v ) v y.
(11)
(v 1 − k)
..
.

Table . Simulation study: size of regression kink estimators.
Estimate
DGP







Interval Length

Type I Error Rate

Method

Mean

SD

Asymp

Permute

Asymp

Permute

FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT

− .
.
− .
.
− .
−.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

NOTES: To compare the false rejection rate (size) of asymptotic and permutation-based methods, we analyze the data-generating processes displayed in Figure A.. For
every DGP, we randomly generate , observations with x distributed uniformly on [−,] and y = E (y|x) + ε with ε ∼ N(0, 0.25). FG uses a local linear estimator
with Fan and Gijbels’s () bandwidth, while CCT uses Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik’s (b) estimator. We set the nominal level of the test to %. We reject the null
hypothesis when the estimate at the kink location is outside the % conﬁdence interval, where the interval is constructed either using standard asymptotic methods or
the permutation method described in Section  for a set of  placebo kinks on [−,]. In this setting, the null hypothesis is true by assumption and the Type I error rate
for an accurate estimation method should be %. Reported results are based on  (FG) and  (CCT) draws for each speciﬁcation.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

503

Table . Simulation study: power of regression kink estimators.
Estimate
DGP













Interval Length

Type II Error Rate

True
Kink Size

Method

Mean

SD

Asymp

Permute

Asymp

Permute














FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT
FG
CCT

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

NOTES: To compare the false acceptance rate (power) of asymptotic and permutation-based methods, we analyze the data-generating processes displayed in Figure A.. For
every DGP, we randomly generate , observations with x distributed uniformly on [−,] and y = E (y|x) + ε with ε ∼ N(0, 0.25). FG uses a local linear estimator
with Fan and Gijbels’s () bandwidth, while CCT uses Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik’s (b) estimator. In our baseline speciﬁcation, we randomly choose a kink
location on [−,] with a kink size speciﬁed in column . We set the nominal level of the test to %. We accept the null hypothesis when the % conﬁdence interval
includes zero, where the interval is constructed either using standard asymptotic methods or the permutation method described in Section  for a set of  placebo
kinks on [−,]. Reported results are based on  (FG) and  (CCT) draws for each speciﬁcation.
Table . Empirical study: regression discontinuity estimator.
Estimate

Interval Length

Error Rate

Data

Discontinuity?

Method

Mean

SD

Asymp

Permute

Error

Asymp

Permute

Lee
Lee
LM
LM
Lee
Lee
LM
LM

No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

IK
CCT
IK
CCT
IK
CCT
IK
CCT

.
− .
.
.
.
.
−.
−.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Type I (Size)
Type I (Size)
Type I (Size)
Type I (Size)
Type II ( - Power)
Type II ( - Power)
Type II ( - Power)
Type II ( - Power)

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

NOTES: To compare the false rejection rate (size) and false acceptance rate (power) of asymptotic and permutation-based methods, we analyze data from Lee () and
Ludwig-Miller (LM, ). For the “Yes” Discontinuity rows, we estimate a natural cubic spline, allowing for a jump in the intercept in the knot at the policy discontinuity.
For the “No”Discontinuity rows, we take the true DGP and subtract the estimated jump at the policy discontinuity so that the conditional mean function is continuous at
zero. For Lee, we randomly generate results from , elections with a victory probability equal to the predicted mean of the cubic spline. For LM, we randomly generate
a mortality rate in , counties using a predicted mean of the cubic spline and a standard deviation of .. IK uses a local linear estimator with Imbens Kalyanaraman’s
() bandwidth, while CCT uses Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik’s (b) local linear estimator with quadratic bias-correction. We compute two-sided asymptotic pvalues and permutation-based p-values from placebo kinks on [−,] for Lee and [−,.] for LM using the method described in Section  and set the nominal level
of the test to %. The permutation test is based on  placebo kinks. Reported results are based on  (FG) and  (CCT) draws of each dataset.

The analysis of size and power of asymptotic and permutation
test-based inference follows the same structure as in Sections
4.1 and 4.2 and we report the results of our simulations in
Table 4, which also features randomization inference for the RD
design based on the approach in Cattaneo, Frandsen, and Titiunik (2015). The simulation studies reveal that for both RD applications the permutation test and asymptotic inference lead to
actual size close to nominal size and have comparable Type II
error rates.
We also find broadly similar results using a different permutation test proposed by Cattaneo, Frandsen and Titiunik (2015,
CFT in the following), which holds the location of the discontinuity fixed and randomly varies which observations are assigned
to the treatment and control. Specifically, we implemented CFT
for 50 simulated datasets based on Lee (window of 1) and LM
(window of 1.1, following Cattaneo, Titiunik, and Vazquez-Bare
forthcoming). With nominal size of 5%, the Type I error rates
were 0.28 (Lee) and 0.04 (LM), while the Type II error rates
were 0.00 (Lee) and 0.78 (LM). CFT’s performance is similar to
the asymptotic and permutation method’s in Table 4 except that
CFT over-rejects the null in the Lee empirical setting.

6. Conclusion
We develop a permutation test for the regression kink design and
document its performance compared to standard asymptotic
inference. The thought experiment underlying our test differs
from the one of standard asymptotic inference, which is based
on the thought experiment of drawing observations from a large
population so that standard errors reflect sampling uncertainty.
Our test follows the randomization inference approach in taking
the sample as given and takes the assignment of treatment—here
the location of the kink point—as a random variable and thus the
source of uncertainty.
Nonlinearity is ubiquitous in many of the settings in which
RK designs are applied. In the presence of such nonlinearity,
the test can offer a complement to existing methods and is
more robust than asymptotic inference with standard bandwidth choice. Based on the results of our simulation studies,
we recommend that practitioners: (1) avoid using linear and
quadratic RK estimators with FG bandwidth choice, (2) use
CCT’s robust procedure as preferred procedure for estimating
slope changes, (3) use the distribution of placebo estimates to
assess whether they will have power to detect economically

504

P. GANONG AND S. JÄGER

meaningful results in their context, (4) report p-values constructed by comparing their point estimate to the distribution
of placebo estimates, and (5) report the robustness of the permutation test to different assumptions on the placebo kink distribution.

Supplementary Materials
The online supplementary materials contain the appendices for the article.

Acknowledgments
We thank Alberto Abadie, Josh Angrist, David Card, Matias Cattaneo, Avi
Feller, Edward Glaeser, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Guido Imbens, Maximilian Kasy, Zhuan Pei, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and Guillaume Pouliot
as well as participants at Harvard University’s Research in Statistics Seminar and the Research in Econometrics Seminar for helpful comments and
discussions. We are especially thankful to Gary Chamberlain, Raj Chetty
and Larry Katz for guidance and suggestions. We thank Andrea Weber
and Camille Landais for sharing supplemental figures based on administrative UI data. We thank Harvard’s Lab for Economic Applications and Policy for financial support and Carolin Baum, David Poth, Michael Schöner,
Shawn Storm, Cody Tuttle, and Thorben Wölk for excellent research
assistance.

References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G., and Wooldridge, J. (2014), “Finite Population Causal Standard Errors,” Working Paper. [496]
Abadie, A., Diamond, A., and Hainmueller, J. (2010), “Synthetic Control
Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 105, 493–505. [496]
Ando, M. (forthcoming), “How Much Should We Trust Regression-KinkDesign Estimates?” Empirical Economics, 53, 1287–1322. [496]
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and Mullainathan, S. (2004), “How Much Should
We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 119, 249–75. [496]
Britto, D. G. C. d. (2015), “Unemployment Insurance and the Duration of
Employment: Evidence From a Regression Kink Design,” SSRN Working Paper 2648166. [494,496]
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., and Farrell, M. H. (2016), “Coverage Error
Optimal Confidence Intervals for Regression Discontinuity Designs,”
Working Paper. [494]
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., and Titiunik, R. (2014a), “Robust DataDriven Inference in the Regression-Discontinuity Design,” Stata Journal, 14, 909–946. [495,497]
——— (2014b), “Robust Nonparametric Confidence Intervals for
Regression-Discontinuity Designs,” Econometrica, 82, 2295–2326.
[494,503]
——— (2015), “Optimal Data-Driven Regression Discontinuity Plots,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 110, 1753–1769. [495]
Card, D., Johnston, A., Leung, P., Mas, A., and Pei, Z. (2015a), “The Effect of
Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment Insurance
Receipt: New Evidence from a Regression Kink Design in Missouri,
2003–2013,” American Economic Review, 105, 126–30. [494,496]
Card, D., Lee, D. S., Pei, Z., and Weber, A. (2015b), “Inference on Causal
Effects in a Generalized Regression Kink Design,” Econometrica, 83,
2463–2483. [495]
Cattaneo, M., Frandsen, B., and Titiunik, R. (2015), “Randomization Inference in the Regression Discontinuity Design: An Application to Party
Advantages in the U.S. Senate,” Journal of Causal Inference, 3, 1–24.
[496,499,503]
Cattaneo, M., Titiunik, R., and Vazquez-Bare, G. (forthcoming), “Comparing Inference Approaches for RD Designs: A Reexamination of the
Effect of Head Start on Child Mortality,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 36, 643–681. [499,503]

Chetty, R., Looney, A., and Kroft, K. (2009), “Salience and Taxation: Theory
and Evidence,” The American Economic Review, 99, 1145–1177. [496]
Engström, P., Nordblom, K., Ohlsson, H., and Persson, A. (2015), “Tax
Compliance and Loss Aversion,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 7, 132–164. [496]
Fan, J., and Gijbels, I. (1996), Local Polynomial Modelling and its Applications (vol. 66), Boca Raton, FL: Chapman and Hall. [495,497,498]
Fisher, R. (1935), The Design of Experiments, Oxford, England: Oliver and
Boyd. [496,499]
Florens, J.-P., Heckman, J. J., Meghir, C., and Vytlacil, E. (2008), “Identification of Treatment Effects Using Control Functions in Models
With Continuous, Endogenous Treatment and Heterogeneous Effects,”
Econometrica, 76, 1191–1206. [496,497]
Gelman, A., and Imbens, G. (2014), “Why High-Order Polynomials Should
Not be Used in Regression Discontinuity Designs,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper. [496,499]
Ho, D. E., and Imai, K. (2006), “Randomization Inference With Natural
Experiments: An Analysis of Ballot Effects in the 2003 California Recall
Election,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101, 888–900.
[496]
Imbens, G., and Kalyanaraman, K. (2012), “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for
the Regression Discontinuity Estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies, 79, 933–959. [503]
Imbens, G. W., and Lemieux, T. (2008), “Regression Discontinuity Designs:
A Guide to Practice,” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 615–635. [494,496]
Imbens, G. W., and Rosenbaum, P. R. (2005), “Robust, Accurate Confidence
Intervals With a Weak Instrument: Quarter of Birth and Education,”
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 168, 109–126. [496]
Imbens, G. W., and Rubin, D. B. (2015), Causal Inference in Statistics, and
in the Social and Biomedical Sciences, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. [500,501]
Kolsrud, J., Landais, C., Nilsson, P., and Spinnewijn, J. (2015), “The Optimal Timing of Unemployment Benefits: Theory and Evidence From
Sweden,” IZA Discussion Paper 9185. [494,495]
Kyyrä, T., and Pesola, H. (2015), “The Effects of Unemployment Insurance
Benefits on Subsequent Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence From an
RKD Approach,” VATT Working Paper. [494,496]
Landais, C. (2015), “Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Benefits Using the Regression Kink Design,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 7, 243–278. [494,496]
Lee, D. S. (2008), “Randomized Experiments From Non-Random Selection
in US House Elections,” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 675–697. [503]
Lehmann, E., and Stein, C. (1949), “On the Theory of Some Non-Parametric
Hypotheses,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 20, 28–45. [496]
Ludwig, J., Miller, D. L., (2007), “Does Head Start Improve Children’s
Life Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 159–208. [502]
Nielsen, H. S., Sørensen, T., and Taber, C. R. (2010), “Estimating the Effect
of Student Aid on College Enrollment: Evidence From a Government
Grant Policy Reform,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2,
185–215. [494]
Pitman, E. (1937), “Significance Tests Which May be Applied to Samples
From any Populations,” Supplement to the Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, 4, 119–130. [499]
Romano, J. P. (1990), “On the Behavior of Randomization Tests Without
a Group Invariance Assumption,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 85, 686–692. [499]
Rosenbaum, P. R. (2001), “Stability in the Absence of Treatment,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 96, 210–219. [496]
——— (2002), Observational Studies (2nd ed.), New York: Springer. [496]
Sovago, S. (2015), “The effect of the UI benefit on labor market outcomesregression kink evidence from the Netherlands,” Working Paper.
[494,496]
Thistlethwaite, D. L., and Campbell, D. T. (1960), “RegressionDiscontinuity Analysis: An Alternative to the ex Post Facto Experiment,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 51, 309. [494]
Welch, W. J. (1990), “Construction of Permutation Tests,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 85, 693–698. [496]
Welch, W. J., and Gutierrez, L. G. (1988), “Robust Permutation Tests for
Matched-Pairs Designs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
83, 450–455. [496]

