Econometrica, Vol. 87, No. 4 (July, 2019), 1307–1340

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES:
METHOD AND APPLICATION TO CONGRESSIONAL SPEECH
MATTHEW GENTZKOW
Department of Economics, Stanford University and NBER
JESSE M. SHAPIRO
Department of Economics, Brown University and NBER
MATT TADDY
Amazon
We study the problem of measuring group differences in choices when the dimensionality of the choice set is large. We show that standard approaches suffer from a
severe finite-sample bias, and we propose an estimator that applies recent advances in
machine learning to address this bias. We apply this method to measure trends in the
partisanship of congressional speech from 1873 to 2016, defining partisanship to be the
ease with which an observer could infer a congressperson’s party from a single utterance. Our estimates imply that partisanship is far greater in recent years than in the
past, and that it increased sharply in the early 1990s after remaining low and relatively
constant over the preceding century.
KEYWORDS: Partisanship, polarization, machine learning, text analysis.

1. INTRODUCTION
IN MANY SETTINGS, researchers seek to measure differences in the choices made by different groups, and the way such differences evolve over time. Examples include measuring
the extent of racial segregation in residential choices (Reardon and Firebaugh (2002)),
of partisanship in digital media consumption (Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), Flaxman,
Goel, and Rao (2016)), of geographic differences in treatment choices of physicians
(Chandra, Cutler, and Song (2012)), and of differences between demographic groups in
survey responses (Bertrand and Kamenica (2018)). We consider the problem of measuring such differences in settings where the dimensionality of the choice set is large—that
is, where the number of possible choices is large relative to the number of actual choices
observed. We show that in such settings, standard approaches suffer from a severe finitesample bias, and we propose methods based on recent advances in machine learning that
address this bias in a way that is computationally tractable with large-scale data.
Our approach is motivated by a specific application: measuring trends in party differences in political speech. It is widely apparent that America’s two political parties
Matthew Gentzkow: gentzkow@stanford.edu
Jesse M. Shapiro: jesse_shapiro_1@brown.edu
Matt Taddy: mataddy@amazon.com
We acknowledge funding from the Initiative on Global Markets and the Stigler Center at Chicago Booth,
the National Science Foundation, the Brown University Population Studies and Training Center, and the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). We thank Egor Abramov, Brian Knight, John Marshall,
Suresh Naidu, Vincent Pons, Justin Rao, and Gaurav Sood for their comments and suggestions. We thank
Frances Lee for sharing her data on congressional communications staff. We also thank numerous seminar
audiences and our many dedicated research assistants for their contributions to this project. This work was
completed in part with resources provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center and the
Stanford Research Computing Center. The data providers and funding agencies bear no responsibility for use
of the data or for interpretations or inferences based upon such uses.
© 2019 The Econometric Society

https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA16566

1308

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

speak different languages.1 Partisan differences in language diffuse into media coverage (Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Martin and Yurukoglu (2017)) and other domains of
public discourse (Greenstein and Zhu (2012), Jensen, Naidu, Kaplan, and Wilse-Samson
(2012)), and partisan framing has been shown to have large effects on public opinion
(Nelson, Clawson, and Oxley (1997), Graetz and Shapiro (2006), Chong and Druckman
(2007)).
Our main question of interest is to what extent the party differences in speech that
we observe today are a new phenomenon. One can easily find examples of politically
charged terms in America’s distant past.2 Yet the magnitude of the differences between
parties, the deliberate strategic choices that seem to underlie them, and the expanding
role of consultants, focus groups, and polls (Bai (2005), Luntz (2006), Issenberg (2012))
suggest that the partisan differences in language that we see today might represent a
consequential change (Lakoff (2003)). If the two parties speak more differently today
than in the past, these divisions could be contributing to deeper polarization in Congress
and cross-party animus in the broader public.
We use data on the text of speeches in the U.S. Congress from 1873 to 2016 to quantify
the magnitude of partisan differences in speech, and to characterize the way these differences have evolved over time. We specify a multinomial model of speech with choice
probabilities that vary by party. We measure partisan differences in speech in a given session of Congress by the ease with which an observer who knows the model could guess
a speaker’s party based solely on the speaker’s choice of a single phrase. We call this
measure partisanship for short.
To compute an accurate estimate of partisanship, we must grapple with two methodological challenges. The first is the finite-sample bias mentioned above. The bias arises
because the number of phrases a speaker could choose is large relative to the total amount
of speech we observe, so many phrases are said mostly by one party or the other purely by
chance. Naive estimators interpret such differences as evidence of partisanship, leading
to a bias we show can be many orders of magnitude larger than the true signal in the data.
Second, although our model takes a convenient multinomial logit form, the large number of choices and parameters makes standard approaches to estimation computationally
infeasible.
We use two estimation approaches to address these challenges. The first is a leave-out
estimator that addresses the main source of finite-sample bias while allowing for simple
inspection of the data. The second, our preferred estimator, uses an L1 or lasso-type
penalty on key model parameters to control bias, and a Poisson approximation to the
multinomial logit likelihood to permit distributed computing. A permutation test and
an out-of-sample validation both suggest that any bias that remains in these estimates is
dramatically lower than in standard approaches, and small relative to the true variation
in partisanship over time.
We find that the partisanship of language has exploded in recent decades, reaching an
unprecedented level. From 1873 to the early 1990s, partisanship was nearly constant and
1
See, for example, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Ball (2013), and Economist (2013). Within hours of the
2016 killing of 49 people in a nightclub in Orlando, Democrats were calling the event a “mass shooting”—
linking it to the broader problem of gun violence—while Republicans were calling it an act of “radical Islamic
terrorism”—linking it to concerns about national security and immigration (Andrews and Buchanan (2016)).
2
In the 1946 essay “Politics and the English Language,” George Orwell discusses the widespread use of
political euphemisms (Orwell (1946)). Northerners referred to the American Civil War as the “War of the
Rebellion” or the “Great Rebellion,” while southerners called it the “War for Southern Independence” or, in
later years, the “War of Northern Aggression” (McCardell (2004)).

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1309

fairly small in magnitude: in the 43rd session of Congress (1873–1875), the probability
of correctly guessing a speaker’s party based on a one-minute speech was 54 percent; by
the 101st session (1989–1990), this figure had increased to 57 percent. Beginning with the
congressional election of 1994, partisanship turned sharply upward, with the probability
of guessing correctly based on a one-minute speech climbing to 73 percent by the 110th
session (2007–2009). Methods that do not correct for finite-sample bias, including the
maximum likelihood estimator of our model, instead imply that partisanship is no higher
today than in the past.
We unpack the recent increase in partisanship along a number of dimensions. The most
partisan phrases in each period—defined as those phrases most diagnostic of the speaker’s
party—align well with the issues emphasized in party platforms and, in recent years, include well-known partisan phrases such as “death tax” and “estate tax.” Manually classifying phrases into substantive topics shows that the increase in partisanship is due more
to changes in the language used to discuss a given topic (e.g., “death tax” vs. “estate tax”)
than to changes in the topics parties emphasize (e.g., Republicans focusing more on taxes
and Democrats focusing more on labor issues).
While we cannot definitively say why partisanship of language increased when it did,
the evidence points to innovation in political persuasion as a proximate cause. The 1994
inflection point in our series coincides precisely with the Republican takeover of Congress
led by Newt Gingrich, under a platform called the Contract with America (Gingrich and
Armey (1994)). This election is widely considered a watershed moment in political marketing, with consultants such as Frank Luntz applying novel techniques to identify effective language and disseminate it to candidates (Lakoff (2004), Luntz (2004), Bai (2005)).
We also discuss related changes such as the expansion of cable television coverage that
may have provided further incentives for linguistic innovation.
This discussion highlights that partisanship of speech as we define it is a distinct phenomenon from other inter-party differences. In particular, the large body of work building on the ideal point model of Poole and Rosenthal (1985) finds that inter-party differences in roll-call voting fell from the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century, and
have since steadily increased (McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2015)). These dynamics
are very different from those we observe in speech, consistent with our expectation that
speech and roll-call votes respond to different incentives and constraints, and suggesting that the analysis of speech may reveal aspects of the political landscape that are not
apparent from the analysis of roll-call votes.
We build on methods developed by Taddy (2013, 2015). Many aspects of the current
paper, including our proposed leave-out estimator, our approaches to validation and inference, and the covariate specification of our model, are novel with respect to that prior
work. Most importantly, Taddy (2013, 2015) made no attempt to define or quantify the
divergence in language between groups either at a point in time or over time, nor did he
discuss the finite-sample biases that arise in doing so. Our paper also relates to other work
on measuring document partisanship, including Laver, Benoit, and Garry (2003), Groseclose and Milyo (2005), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Kim, Londregan, and Ratkovic
(2018), and Yan, Das, Lavoie, Li, and Sinclair (2018).3
Our paper contributes a recipe for using statistical predictability in a probability model
of speech as a metric of differences in partisan language between groups. Jensen et al.
3
More broadly, our paper relates to work in statistics on authorship determination (Mosteller and Wallace
(1963)), work in economics that uses text to measure the sentiment of a document (e.g., Antweiler and Frank
(2004), Tetlock (2007)), and work that classifies documents according to similarity of text (Blei and Lafferty
(2007), Grimmer (2010)).

1310

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

(2012) used text from the Congressional Record to characterize party differences in language from the late nineteenth century to the present. Their index, which is based on the
observed correlation of phrases with party labels, implies that partisanship has been rising recently but was similarly high in the past. We apply a different method that addresses
finite-sample bias and leads to substantially different conclusions. Lauderdale and Herzog (2016) specified a generative hierarchical model of floor debates and estimated the
model on speech data from the Irish Dail and the U.S. Senate. Studying the U.S. Senate from 1995 to 2014, they found that party differences in speech have increased faster
than party differences in roll-call voting. Peterson and Spirling (2018) studied trends in
the partisanship of speech in the UK House of Commons. In contrast to Lauderdale and
Herzog’s (2016) analysis (and ours), Peterson and Spirling (2018) did not specify a generative model of speech. Instead, Peterson and Spirling (2018) measured partisanship using
the predictive accuracy of several machine-learning algorithms. They cited our article to
justify using randomization tests to check for spurious trends in their measure. These
tests (Peterson and Spirling (2018), Supplemental Material Appendix C) show that their
measure implies significant and time-varying partisanship even in fictitious data in which
speech patterns are independent of party.
The recipe that we develop can be applied to a broad class of problems in which the
goal is to characterize group differences in high-dimensional choices. A prominent example is the measurement of residential segregation (e.g., Reardon and Firebaugh (2002)),
where the groups might be defined by race or ethnicity and the choices might be neighborhoods or schools. The finite-sample bias that we highlight has been noted in that context by Cortese, Falk, and Cohen (1976) and addressed by benchmarking against random
allocation (Carrington and Troske (1997)), applying asymptotic or bootstrap bias corrections (Allen, Burgess, Davidson, and Windmeijer (2015)), and estimating mixture models
(Rathelot (2012), D’Haultfœuille and Rathelot (2017)).4 Recent work has derived axiomatic foundations for segregation measures (Echenique and Fryer (2007), Frankel and
Volij (2011)), asking which measures of segregation satisfy certain properties.5 Instead,
our approach is to specify a generative model of the data and to measure group differences using objects that have a well-defined meaning in the context of the model.6 In the
body of the paper, we note some formal connections to the literature on residential segregation, and in an earlier draft, we pursue a detailed application to trends in residential
segregation by political affiliation (Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy (2017)).
2. CONGRESSIONAL SPEECH DATA
Our primary data source is the text of the United States Congressional Record (hereafter,
the Record) from the 43rd Congress to the 114th Congress. We obtain digital text from
4
Logan, Foster, Ke, and Li (2018) developed methods for bias correction in the context of measuring residential segregation by income.
5
See also Mele (2013) and Ballester and Vorsatz (2014). Our measure of partisanship is also related to
measures of cohesiveness in preferences of social groups, as in Alcalde-Unzu and Vorsatz (2013).
6
In this respect, our paper builds on Ellison and Glaeser (1997), who used a model-based approach to
measure agglomeration spillovers in U.S. manufacturing. Davis, Dingel, Monras, and Morales (2019) used a
structural demand model to estimate racial segregation in restaurant choices in a sample of New York City
Yelp reviewers. Mele (2017) showed how to estimate preferences in a random-graph model of network formation and measured the degree of homophily in preferences. Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2002) used an
equilibrium model of a housing market to study the effect of changes in preferences on patterns of residential
segregation. Fossett (2011) used an agent-based model to study the effect of agent preferences on the degree
of segregation.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1311

HeinOnline, who performed optical character recognition (OCR) on scanned print volumes. The Record is a “substantially verbatim” record of speech on the floor of Congress
(Amer (1993)). We exclude Extensions of Remarks, which are used to print unspoken
additions by members of the House that are not germane to the day’s proceedings.7
The modern Record is issued in a daily edition, printed at the end of each day that
Congress is in session, and in a bound edition that collects the content for an entire
Congress. These editions differ in formatting and in some minor elements of content
(Amer (1993)). Our data contain bound editions for the 43rd to 111th Congresses, and
daily editions for the 97th to 114th Congresses. We use the bound edition in the sessions where it is available and the daily edition thereafter. The Supplemental Material
(Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy (2019)) shows results from an alternative data build that
uses the bound edition through the 96th Congress and the daily edition thereafter.
We use an automated script to parse the raw text into individual speeches. Beginnings
of speeches are demarcated in the Record by speaker names, usually in all caps (e.g., “Mr.
ALLEN of Illinois.”). We determine the identity of each speaker using a combination of
manual and automated procedures, and append data on the state, chamber, and gender of
each member from historical sources.8 We exclude any speaker who is not a Republican or
a Democrat, speakers who are identified by office rather than name, non-voting delegates,
and speakers whose identities we cannot determine.9 The Supplemental Material presents
the results of a manual audit of the reliability of our parsing.
The input to our main analysis is a matrix Ct whose rows correspond to speakers and
whose columns correspond to distinct two-word phrases or bigrams (hereafter, simply
“phrases”). An element cijt thus gives the number of times speaker i has spoken phrase j in
session (Congress) t. To create these counts, we first perform the following pre-processing
steps: (i) delete hyphens and apostrophes; (ii) replace all other punctuation with spaces;
(iii) remove non-spoken parenthetical insertions; (iv) drop a list of extremely common
7
The Record seeks to capture speech as it was intended to have been said (Amer (1993)). Speakers are
allowed to insert new remarks, extend their remarks on a specific topic, and remove errors from their own
remarks before the Record is printed. The rules for such insertions and edits, as well as the way they appear in
print, differ between the House and Senate, and have changed to some degree over time (Amer (1993), Johnson (1997), Haas (2015)). We are not aware of any significant changes that align with the changing partisanship
we observe in our data. We present our results separately for the House and Senate in the Supplemental Material (Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy (2019)).
8
Our main source for information on congresspeople is the congress-legislators GitHub repository https://
github.com/unitedstates/congress-legislators/tree/1473ea983d5538c25f5d315626445ab038d8141b accessed on
November 15, 2016. We make manual corrections, and add additional information from ICPSR and McKibbin
(1997), the Voteview Roll Call Data (Carroll, Lewis, Lo, McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2015a, 2015b)), and
the King (1995) election returns. Some of these sources include metadata from Martis (1989).
9
In the rare case in which a speaker switches parties during a term, we assign the new party to all the
speech in that term. We handle the similarly rare case in which a speaker switches chambers in a single session (usually from the House to the Senate) by treating the text from each chamber as a distinct speakersession. If a speaker begins a session in the House as a non-voting delegate of a territory and receives voting privileges after the territory gains statehood, we treat the speaker as a voting delegate for the entirety
of that speaker-session. If a non-voting delegate of the House later becomes a senator, we treat each position as a separate speaker-session. We obtain data on the acquisition of statehood from http://www.thirtythousand.org/pages/QHA-02.htm (accessed on January 18, 2017) and data on the initial delegates for each state
from https://web.archive.org/web/20060601025644/http://www.gpoaccess.gov/serialset/cdocuments/hd108-222/
index.html. When we assign a majority party in each session, we count the handful of independents that caucus
with the Republicans or Democrats as contributing to the party’s majority in the Senate. Due to path dependence in our data build, such independents are omitted when computing the majority party in the House. The
Supplemental Material shows the results of a specification in which we exclude from the sample any speaker
whose party changes between sessions.

1312

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

words;10 and (v) reduce words to their stems according to the Porter2 stemming algorithm (Porter (2009)). We then drop phrases that are likely to be procedural or have low
semantic meaning according to criteria we define in the Supplemental Material. Finally,
we restrict attention to phrases spoken at least 10 times in at least one session, spoken
in at least 10 unique speaker-sessions, and spoken at least 100 times across all sessions.
The Supplemental Material presents results from a sample in which we tighten each of
these restrictions by 10 percent. The Supplemental Material also presents results from an
alternative construction of Ct containing counts of three-word phrases or trigrams.
The decision to represent text as a matrix of phrase counts is fairly common in text
analysis, as is the decision to reduce the dimensionality of the data by removing word
stems and non-word content (Gentzkow, Kelly, and Taddy (Forthcoming)). We remove
procedural phrases because they appear frequently and their use is likely not informative
about the inter-party differences that we wish to measure (Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010)).
We remove infrequently used phrases to economize on computation (Gentzkow, Kelly,
and Taddy (Forthcoming)).
The resulting vocabulary contains 508,352 unique phrases spoken a total of 287 million
times by 7732 unique speakers. We analyze data at the level of the speaker-session, of
which there are 36,161. The Supplemental Material reports additional summary statistics
for our estimation sample and vocabulary.
We identify 22 substantive topics based on our knowledge of the Record. We associate
each topic with a non-mutually exclusive subset of the vocabulary. To do this, we begin by
grouping a set of partisan phrases into the 22 topics (e.g., taxes, defense, etc.). For each
topic, we form a set of keywords by (i) selecting relevant words from the associated partisan phrases and (ii) manually adding other topical words. Finally, we identify all phrases
in the vocabulary that include one of the topic keywords, are used more frequently than a
topic-specific occurrence threshold, and are not obvious false matches. The Supplemental Material lists, for each topic, the keywords, the occurrence threshold, and a random
sample of included and excluded phrases.
3. MODEL AND MEASURE OF PARTISANSHIP
3.1. Model of Speech
The observed outcome is a J-vector cit of phrase counts for speaker i, which we assume
comes from a multinomial distribution


cit ∼ MN mit  qP(i)
(xit ) 
(1)
t

with mit = j cijt denoting the total amount of speech by speaker i in session t, P(i) ∈
{R D} denoting the party affiliation of speaker i, xit denoting a K-vector of (possibly timevarying) speaker characteristics, and qPt (xit ) ∈ (0 1)J denoting the vector of choice probabilities. We let Rt = {i : P(i) = R mit > 0} and Dt = {i : P(i) = D mit > 0} denote the set
of Republicans and Democrats, respectively, active in session t. The speech-generating
process is fully characterized by the verbosity mit and the probability qPt (·) of speaking
each phrase.
10
The set of these “stopwords” we drop is defined by a list obtained from http://snowball.tartarus.org/
algorithms/english/stop.txt on November 11, 2010.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1313

We suppose further that the choice probabilities are

euilt 
qjtP(i) (xit ) = euijt
(2)

l

it

uijt = αjt + x γ jt + ϕjt 1i∈Rt 
Here αjt is a scalar parameter capturing the baseline popularity of phrase j in session t,
γ jt is a K-vector capturing the effect of characteristics xit on the propensity to use phrase
j in session t, and ϕjt is a scalar parameter capturing the effect of party affiliation on the
propensity to use phrase j in session t. If xit := xt , any phrase probabilities (qRt (·) qD
t (·))
can be represented with appropriate choice of parameters in equation (2).
The model in (1) and (2) is restrictive, and it ignores many important aspects of speech.
For example, it implies that the propensity to use a given phrase is not related to other
phrases used by speaker i in session t, and need not be affected by the speaker’s verbosity mit . We adopt this model because it is tractable and has proved useful in extracting
meaning from text in many related contexts (Groseclose and Milyo (2005), Taddy (2013,
2015)).
The model also implies that speaker identities matter only through party affiliation P(i)
and the characteristics xit . Specification of xit is therefore important for our analysis. We
consider specifications of xit with different sets of observable characteristics, as well as a
specification with unobserved speaker characteristics (i.e., speaker random effects).
We assume throughout that if a phrase (or set of phrases) is excluded from the choice
set, the relative frequencies of the remaining phrases are unchanged. We use this assumption in Sections 6 and 7 to compute average partisanship for interesting subsets of the full
vocabulary. This assumption encodes the independence of irrelevant alternatives familiar
from other applications of the multinomial logit model. It is a restrictive assumption, as
some phrases are clearly better substitutes than others, but it provides a useful benchmark for analysis absent a method for estimating flexible substitution patterns in a large
vocabulary.
3.2. Measure of Partisanship
For given characteristics x, we define partisanship of speech to be the divergence between qRt (x) and qD
t (x). When these vectors are close, Republicans and Democrats speak
similarly and we say that partisanship is low. When these vectors are far from each other,
the parties speak differently and we say that partisanship is high.
We choose a particular measure of this divergence that has a clear interpretation in
the context of our model: the posterior probability that an observer with a neutral prior
expects to assign to a speaker’s true party after hearing the speaker utter a single phrase.
DEFINITION: The partisanship of speech at x is


1
1
πt (x) = qRt (x) · ρt (x) + qD
t (x) · 1 − ρt (x) 
2
2

(3)

where
ρjt (x) =

qjtR (x)
qjtR (x) + qjtD (x)



(4)

1314

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

Average partisanship in session t is
πt =


1
πt (xit )
|Rt ∪ Dt | i∈R ∪D
t

(5)

t

To understand these definitions, note that ρjt (x) is the posterior belief that an observer
with a neutral prior assigns to a speaker being Republican if the speaker chooses phrase j
in session t and has characteristics x. Partisanship πt (x) averages ρjt (x) over the possible
parties and phrases: if the speaker is a Republican (which occurs with probability 12 ), the
probability of a given phrase j is qjtR (x) and the probability assigned to the true party after
hearing j is ρjt (x); if the speaker is a Democrat, these probabilities are qjtD (x) and 1 −
ρjt (x), respectively. Average partisanship π t , which is our target for estimation, averages
πt (xit ) over the characteristics xit of speakers active in session t. Average partisanship is
defined with respect to a given vocabulary of J phrases.
There are many possible measures of the divergence between qRt (x) and qD
t (x). We
show in the Supplemental Material that the time series of partisanship looks qualitatively
similar if we replace our partisanship measure with either the Euclidean distance between
qRt (x) and qD
t (x) or the implied mutual information between party and phrase choice,
though the series for Euclidean distance is noisier.
Partisanship is closely related to the isolation index, a common index of residential segregation (White (1986), Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999)).11 Frankel and Volij (2011)
characterized a large set of segregation indices based on a set of ordinal axioms. Ignoring
covariates x, our measure satisfies six of these axioms: Non-triviality, Continuity, Scale
Invariance, Symmetry, Composition Invariance, and the School Division Property. It fails
to satisfy one axiom: Independence.12
Average partisanship π t summarizes how well an observer can predict a hypothetical
speaker’s party given a single realization and knowledge of the true model. This is distinct
from the question of how well an econometrician can predict a given speaker’s party in a
given sample of text.
4. ESTIMATION, INFERENCE, AND VALIDATION
4.1. Plug-in Estimators
Maximum likelihood estimation is straightforward in our context. Ignoring covariates
x, the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) can be computed by plugging in empirical
analogues for the terms that appear in equation (3).
More
 precisely,
 let q̂it = cit /mit be the empirical phrase frequencies for speaker i. Let
q̂Pt = i∈Pt cit / i∈Pt mit be the empirical phrase frequencies for party P, and let ρ̂jt =
To see this, imagine that choices are neighborhoods rather than phrases, and let mit = 1 for all i and
t, so that each individual chooses one and only one neighborhood. Isolation is the difference in the share
Republican of the average Republican’s neighborhood and the average Democrat’s neighborhood. In an infinite population with an equal share of Republicans and Democrats, all with characteristics x, this is simply
2πt (x) − 1.
12
In our context, Independence would require that the ranking in terms of partisanship of two years t and
s remains unchanged if we add a new set of phrases J ∗ to the vocabulary whose probabilities are the same in
P
∀P j ∈ J ∗ ). Frankel and Volij (2011) listed one other axiom, the Group Division Property,
both years (qjtP = qjs
which is only applicable for indices where the number of groups (i.e., parties in our case) is allowed to vary.
11

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1315

q̂Rjt /(q̂Rjt + q̂D
jt ), excluding from the choice set any phrases that are not spoken in session t.
Then the MLE of π t when xit := xt is
π̂tMLE =

1  R
1 
q̂t · ρ̂t + q̂D
· (1 − ρ̂t )
2
2 t

(6)

An important theme of our paper is that this and related estimators can be severely
biased in finite samples even if xit := xt . Intuitively, partisanship will be high when the
dispersion of the posteriors ρjt is large—that is, when some phrases are spoken far more
by Republicans and others are spoken far more by Democrats. The MLE estimates the
ρjt using their sample analogues ρ̂jt . However, sampling error will tend to increase the
dispersion of the ρ̂jt relative to the dispersion of the true ρjt . When the number of phrases
is large relative to the volume of speech observed, many phrases will be spoken only a
handful of times, and so may be spoken mainly by Republicans (ρ̂jt ≈ 1) or mainly by
Democrats (ρ̂jt ≈ 0) by chance even if the true choice probabilities do not differ by party.
To see the source of the bias more formally, note that π̂tMLE is a convex function of q̂Rt
and q̂D
t , and so Jensen’s inequality implies that it has a positive bias. We can also use the
R
D
R
fact that E(q̂Rt  q̂D
t ) = (qt  qt ) to decompose the bias of a generic term (q̂t ) · ρ̂t as
  

 


 
(7)
E q̂Rt · ρ̂t − qRt · ρt = qRt · E(ρ̂t − ρt ) + Cov q̂Rt − qRt  (ρ̂t − ρt ) 
The second term will typically be far from zero because the sampling error in ρ̂t is meR
chanically related to the sampling error in (q̂Rt  q̂D
t ). Any positive residual in q̂t will increase both terms inside the covariance; any negative residual will do the reverse. The
13
first term is also nonzero because ρ̂t is a nonlinear transformation of (q̂Rt  q̂D
though
t ),
this component of the bias tends to be small in practice.
The bias we highlight is not specific to the MLE, but will tend to arise for any measure
of group differences that uses observed choices as a direct approximation of true choice
probabilities. This is especially transparent if we measure the difference between qRt and
qD
t using a norm such as Euclidean distance: Jensen’s inequality implies that for any norm
· , E q̂Rt − q̂D
> 
qRt − qD
t
t . Similar issues arise for the measure of Jensen et al. (2012),
1
which is given by mt j mjt | corr(cijt  1i∈Rt )|. If speech is independent of party (qRt = qD
t )
and verbosity is fixed, then the population value of corr(cijt  1i∈Rt ) is zero. But in any finite
sample, the correlation will be nonzero with positive probability, so the measure may
imply party differences even when speech is unrelated to party.
4.2. Leave-out Estimator
The first approach we propose to addressing this bias is a leave-out estimator that uses
different samples to estimate q̂Pt and ρ̂t . This makes the errors in the former independent of the errors in the latter by construction, and so eliminates the second bias term in
equation (7).
The leave-out estimator is given by
π̂tLO =

1 1 
1 1 
q̂it · ρ̂−it +
q̂it · (1 − ρ̂−it )
2 |Rt | i∈R
2 |Dt | i∈D
t

(8)

t

Suppose that there are two speakers, one Democrat and one Republican, each with mit = 1. There are
two phrases. The Republican says the second phrase with certainty and the Democrat says the second phrase
with probability 001. Then E(ρ̂2t ) = 001( 12 ) + 099(1) = 0995 > ρ2t = 1/101 ≈ 0990.
13

1316

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

where ρ̂−it is the analogue of ρ̂t computed from the speech of all speakers other than i.14
This estimator is biased for π t , even if xit := xt , because of the first term in equation (7),
but we expect (and find) that this bias is small in practice.
The leave-out estimator is simple to compute and provides a direct look at the patterns
in the data. It also has important limitations. In particular, it does not allow us to incorporate covariates. In addition, it does not recover the underlying parameters of the model
and so does not directly provide estimates of objects such as the most partisan phrases,
which we rely on heavily in our application.
4.3. Penalized Estimator
The second approach we propose uses a penalized estimator to fully estimate the model
and incorporate covariates. We estimate the parameters {αt  γ t  ϕt }Tt=1 of equation (2) by
minimization of the following penalized objective function:
 




mit exp αjt + xit γ jt + ϕjt 1i∈Rt − cijt αjt + xit γ jt + ϕjt 1i∈Rt
j

t

i



+ ψ |αjt | + γ jt 1 + λj |ϕjt |



(9)

We form an estimate π̂t∗ of π t by substituting estimated parameters into the probability
objects in equation (5).
Because partisanship is defined as a function of the characteristics x, the choice of characteristics to include in the model affects our target for estimation. We wish to include
those characteristics that are likely to be related both to party and to speech but whose
relationship with speech would not generally be thought of as a manifestation of party
differences. A leading example of such a confound is geographic region: speakers from
different parts of the country will tend to come from different parties and to use different phrases, but regional differences in language would not generally be thought of as a
manifestation of party differences.
In our baseline specification, xit consists of indicators for state, chamber, gender, Census region, and whether the party is in the majority for the entirety of the session. The
coefficients γ jt on these attributes are static in time (i.e., γjtk := γjk ) except for those
on Census region, which are allowed to vary freely across sessions to allow more flexibly
for regional variation in speech. The Supplemental Material shows results from a specification in which xit includes unobserved speaker-level preference shocks (i.e., speaker
random effects), from a specification in which xit includes no covariates, and from a specification in which xit includes several additional covariates.
The minimand in (9) encodes two key decisions. First, we approximate the likelihood
of our multinomial logit model with the likelihood of a Poisson model (Palmgren (1981),
Baker (1994), Taddy (2015)), where cijt ∼ Pois(exp[μit + uijt ]), and we use the plug-in
14

P
For each i, j, and t, define q̂−ijt
=



 l∈{Pt \i}

cljt

l∈{Pt \i} mlt

for P ∈ {R D} and

ρ̂−ijt =

R
q̂−ijt
R
D
+ q̂−ijt
q̂−ijt



Implicitly, in each session t, we exclude from the calculation in (8) any phrase that is spoken only by a single
speaker.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1317

estimate μ̂it = log mit of the parameter μit . Because the Poisson and the multinomial logit
share the same conditional likelihood Pr(cit | mit ), their MLEs coincide when μ̂it is the
MLE. Although our plug-in is not the MLE, Taddy (2015) showed that our approach
often performs well in related settings. In the Supplemental Material, we show that our
estimator performs well on data simulated from the multinomial logit model.
We adopt the Poisson approximation because, fixing μ̂it , the likelihood of the Poisson is
separable across phrases. This feature allows us to use distributed computing to estimate
the model parameters (Taddy (2015)). Without the Poisson approximation, computation
of our estimator would be infeasible due to the cost of repeatedly calculating the denominator of the logit choice probabilities.
The second key decision is the use of an L1 penalty λj |ϕjt |, which imposes sparsity
on the party loadings and shrinks them toward zero (Tibshirani (1996)). Sparsity and
shrinkage limit the effect of sampling error on the dispersion of the estimated posteriors
ρjt , which is the source of the bias in π̂tMLE . We determine the penalties λ by regularization
path estimation, first finding λ1j large enough so that ϕjt is estimated to be 0, and then
incrementally decreasing λ2j      λG
j and updating parameter estimates accordingly. An
attractive computational property of this approach is that the coefficient estimates change
smoothly along the path of penalties, so each segment’s solution acts as a hot-start for the
next segment and the optimizations are fast to solve. We then choose the value of λj
that minimizes a Bayesian Information Criterion.15 The Supplemental Material reports a
qualitatively similar time series of partisanship when we use 5- or 10-fold cross-validation
to select the λj that minimizes average out-of-sample deviance.
We also impose a minimal penalty of ψ = 10−5 on the phrase-specific intercepts αjt and
the covariate coefficients γ jt . We do this to handle the fact that some combinations of data
and covariate design do not have an MLE in the Poisson model (Haberman (1973), Santos
Silva and Tenreyro (2010)). A small penalty allows us to achieve numerical convergence
while still treating the covariates in a flexible way.16
4.4. Inference
For all of our main results, we perform inference via subsampling. We draw without
replacement 100 random subsets of size equal to one-tenth the number of speakers (up
to integer restrictions) and re-estimate on each subset. We report confidence intervals
based
√ on the distribution of the estimator across these subsets, under the assumption
of n convergence. We center these confidence intervals around the estimated series
and report uncentered bias-corrected confidence intervals for our main estimator in the
Supplemental Material.
Politis, Romano, and Wolf (1999, Theorem 2.2.1) showed that this procedure yields
valid confidence intervals under the assumption that the distribution of the estimator

15
 The Bayesian Information Criterion we use is −2 it log Pois(cijt ; exp[μ̂i + uijt ]) + df log n, where n =
t (|Dt | + |Rt |) is the number of speaker-sessions and df is a degrees-of-freedom term that (following Zou,
Hastie, and Tibshirani (2007)) is given by the number of parameters estimated with nonzero values (excluding
the μ̂it , as outlined in Taddy (2015)).
16
The Supplemental Material shows how our results vary with alternative values of ψ. Larger values of ψ
decrease computational time for a given problem. Note that, in practice, we implement our regularization path
G
1
−5
computationally as ψλ̃2j      ψλ̃G
j , where λ̃j = ιλ̃j , ι = 10 , and G = 100. To ensure that the choice of λ̃j is
not constrained by the regularization path, we recommend that users choose values of ψ and ι small enough
∗
MLE
or to an estimator π̂t∗ that substantially differs from the
that forcing λ̃j = λ̃G
j for all j leads either to π̂t ≈ π̂t
one chosen by BIC.

1318

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

√
converges weakly to some non-degenerate distribution at a n rate. In the Appendix,
we extend a result of Knight and Fu (2000) to show that this property holds, with fixed
vocabulary and a suitable rate condition on the penalty, for the penalized maximum likelihood estimator of our multinomial logit model. This is the estimator that we approximate
with the Poisson distribution in equation (9). Though we do not pursue formal results for
the case where the vocabulary grows with the sample size, we note that such asymptotics
might better approximate the finite-sample behavior of our estimators.
In the Supplemental Material, we report the results of several exercises designed to
probe the accuracy of our confidence intervals. First, we consider three alternative subsampling strategies: (i) doubling the number of speakers in each subsample, (ii) using
10 non-overlapping subsamples rather than 100 overlapping subsamples, and (iii) using 5
non-overlapping subsamples. Second, we compute confidence intervals based on a parametric bootstrap, repeatedly simulating data from our estimated model and re-estimating
the model on the simulated data. Third, we compute confidence intervals using a samplesplitting procedure that uses one half of the model to perform variable selection and then
estimates the selected model with minimal penalty across repeated bootstrap replicates
on the second half of the sample. All of these procedures yield qualitatively similar conclusions. Note that we do not report results for a standard nonparametric bootstrap; the
standard nonparametric bootstrap is known to be invalid for lasso regression (Chatterjee
and Lahiri (2011)).
4.5. Validation
As usual with nonlinear models, none of the estimators proposed here are exactly unbiased in finite samples. Our goal is to reduce bias to the point that it is dominated by the
signal in the data. We gauge our success in three main ways.
First, we consider a permutation test in which we randomly reassign parties to speakers
and then re-estimate each measure on the resulting data. In this “random” series, qRt = qD
t
by construction, so the true value of πt is equal to 12 in all years. Thus the random series
for an unbiased estimator of πt has expected value 12 in each session t, and the deviation
from 12 provides a valid measure of bias under the permutation.
Second, in the Supplemental Material we present results from exercises in which we
apply our estimators to two types of simulated data. The first exercise is a Monte Carlo in
which we simulate data from our estimated model. The second exercise is a falsification
test in which we simulate data from a model in which qRt and qD
t (and hence partisanship)
are constant over time but verbosity mit is allowed to follow its empirical distribution.
Third, we perform an out-of-sample validation in which our hypothetical observer
learns the partisanship of phrases from one sample of speech and attempts to predict
the party of speakers in another. In particular, we divide the sample of speakers into five
mutually exclusive partitions. For each partition k and each estimator, we estimate the
ρt (x) terms in equation (3) using the given estimator on the sample excluding the kth
partition, and the qRt (x) and qD
t (x) terms using their empirical frequencies within the kth
partition. We then average the estimates across partitions and compare to our in-sample
estimates.
5. MAIN RESULTS
Figure 1 presents the time series of the maximum likelihood estimator π̂tMLE of our
model, and of the index reported by Jensen et al. (2012) computed from their publicly

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1319

FIGURE 1.—Average partisanship and polarization of speech, plug-in estimates. Notes: Panel A plots the average partisanship series from the maximum likelihood estimator π̂tMLE defined in Section 4.1. “Real” series is
from actual data; “random” series is from hypothetical data in which each speaker’s party is randomly assigned
with the probability that the speaker is Republican equal to the average share of speakers who are Republican
in the sessions in which the speaker is active. The shaded region around each series represents a pointwise
confidence interval obtained via subsampling (Politis, Romano, and Wolf (1999)). Specifically, we randomly
draw speakers without replacement to create 100 subsamples each containing (up to integer restrictions) one–
tenth of all speakers and, for each subsample k, we compute the MLE estimate π̂tk . Let τk be the number of
speakers in the kth subsample and let τ be the number√
of speakers in the full sample. Then
√ the confidence
interval on the MLE is 12 + (exp[log(π̂t − 12 ) − (Qtk )(90) / τ] exp[log(π̂t − 12 ) − (Qtk )(11) / τ]), where (Qtk )(b)
100 l
√
1
1
is the bth order statistic of Qtk = τk (log(π̂tk − 12 ) − log([ 100
l=1 π̂t ] − 2 )). Panel B plots
 the standardized

measure of polarization from Jensen et al. (2012). Polarization in session t is defined as j (mjt |ρjt | l mlt ),
where ρjt = corr(cijt  1i∈Rt ); the series is standardized by subtracting its mean and dividing by its standard deviation. “Real” series reproduces the polarization series in Figure 3B of Jensen et al. (2012) using the replication
data for that paper; “random” series uses the same data but randomly assigns each speaker’s party with the
probability that the speaker is Republican equal to the average share of speakers who are Republican in the
sessions in which the speaker is active.

available data.17 Panel A shows that the random series for π̂ MLE is far from 12 , indicating
17
Downloaded from http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Projects/BPEA/Fall-2012/Jensen-Data.zip?la=en
on March 25, 2016. In the Supplemental Material, we show that the dynamics of π̂tMLE in Jensen et al.’s

1320

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

that the bias in the MLE is severe in practice. Variation over time in the magnitude of
the bias dominates the series, leading the random series and the real series to be highly
correlated. Taking the MLE at face value, we would conclude that language was much
more partisan in the past and that the upward trend in recent years is small by historical
standards.
Because bias is a finite-sample property, it is natural to expect that the severity of the
bias in π̂tMLE in a given session t depends on the amount of speech—that is, on the verbosities mit of speakers in that session. The Supplemental Material shows that this is indeed
the case: a first-order approximation to the bias in π̂tMLE as a function of verbosity follows
a similar path to the random series in Panel A of Figure 1, and the dynamics of π̂tMLE are
similar to those in the real series when we allow verbosity to follow its empirical distribu∗
tion but fix phrase frequencies (qRt  qD
t ) at those observed in a particular session t . The
Supplemental Material also shows that while the severity of the bias falls as we exclude
less frequently spoken phrases, very severe sample restrictions are needed to control bias,
and a significant time-varying bias remains even when we exclude 99 percent of phrases
from our calculations.18
Panel B of Figure 1 shows that the Jensen et al. (2012) polarization measure behaves
similarly to the MLE. The plot for the real series replicates the published version. The
random series is far from 0, and the real and random series both trend downward in the
first part of the sample period. Jensen et al. (2012) concluded that polarization has been
increasing recently, but that it was as high or higher in earlier years. The results in Panel
B suggest that the second part of this conclusion could be an artifact of the finite-sample
mechanics of their index.
Figure 2 presents our main estimates. Panel A shows the leave-out estimator π̂tLO . The
random series suggests that the leave-out correction largely purges the estimator of bias:
the series is close to 12 throughout the period.
Panel B presents our preferred penalized estimator, including controls for covariates
xit . Estimates for the random series indicate minimal bias. The Supplemental Material
shows that the use of regularization is the key to the performance of this estimator: imposing only a minimal penalty (i.e., setting λ ≈ 0) leads, as expected, to behavior similar
to that of the MLE. The Supplemental Material also shows that, in contrast to the MLE,
the dynamics of our proposed estimators cannot be explained by changes in verbosity over
time.
Looking at the data through the sharper lens of the leave-out and penalized estimators
reveals that partisanship was low and relatively constant until the early 1990s, then exploded, reaching unprecedented heights in recent years. This is a dramatically different
picture than one would infer from the MLE or the Jensen et al. (2012) series. The sharp
increase in partisanship is much larger than the width of the subsampling confidence intervals.
The increase is also large in magnitude. Recall that average partisanship is the posterior that a neutral observer expects to assign to a speaker’s true party after hearing a
single phrase. Figure 3 extends this concept to show the expected posterior for speeches
of various lengths. An average one-minute speech in our data contains around 33 phrases
(after pre-processing). In 1874, an observer hearing such a speech would expect to have a
(2012) data are similar to those in our own data, which is reassuring as Jensen et al. (2012) obtained the Congressional Record independently, used different processing algorithms, and used a vocabulary of three-word
phrases rather than two-word phrases.
18
Across the sessions in our data, the 99th percentile phrase is spoken between 40 and 192 times per session.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1321

FIGURE 2.—Average partisanship of speech, leave-out and penalized estimates. Notes: Panel A plots the
average partisanship series from the leave-out estimator π̂tLO defined in Section 4.2. Panel B plots the average partisanship series from our preferred penalized estimator π̂t∗ defined in Section 4.3. In each plot,
the “real” series is from actual data and the “random” series is from hypothetical data in which each
speaker’s party is randomly assigned with the probability that the speaker is Republican equal to the average share of speakers who are Republican in the sessions in which the speaker is active. The shaded
region around each series represents a pointwise confidence interval obtained via subsampling (Politis,
Romano, and Wolf (1999)). Specifically, we randomly draw speakers without replacement to create 100
subsamples each containing (up to integer restrictions) one-tenth of all speakers and, for each subsample k, we compute the leave-out estimate π̂tk and the penalized estimate π̂t∗k . Let τk be the number of
speakers in the kth subsample and let τ be the number of √
speakers in the full√sample. Then the confidence interval on the leave-out estimator is (π̂tLO − (Qtk )(90) / τ π̂tLO − (Qtk )(11) / τ), where (Qtk )(b) is the
100 l
√
1
bth order statistic of Qtk = τk (π̂tk − 100
l=1 π̂t ). The confidence interval on the penalized estimator is
√
√
1
1
∗
∗k
+
(exp[log(
π̂
−
)
−
(Q
)
/
τ]
exp[log(
π̂ ∗ − 1 ) − (Qt∗k )(11) / τ]), where (Qt∗k )(b) is the bth order statistic
(90)
t
t
2
2
100 ∗l t 12
√
1
1
∗k
∗k
of Qt = τk (log(π̂t − 2 ) − log([ 100 l=1 π̂t ] − 2 )).

posterior of around 0.54 on the speaker’s true party, only slightly above the prior of 05.
By 1990, this value increased slightly to 0.57. Between 1990 and 2008, however, it leaped
up to 0.73.

1322

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

FIGURE 3.—Informativeness of speech by speech length and session. Notes: For each speaker i and session
t, we calculate, given characteristics xit , the expected posterior that an observer with a neutral prior would place
on a speaker’s true party after hearing a given number of phrases drawn according to our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. We perform this calculation by Monte Carlo simulation and plot the average across
speakers for each given session and length of speech. The vertical line shows the average number of phrases
in one minute of speech. We calculate this by sampling 95 morning-hour debate speeches across the second
session of the 111th Congress and the first session of the 114th Congress. We use https://www.c-span.org/ to
calculate the time-length of each speech and to obtain the text of the Congressional Record associated with each
speech, from which we obtain the count of phrases in our main vocabulary following the procedure outlined
in Section 2. The vertical line shows the average ratio, across speeches, of the phrase count to the number of
minutes of speech.

Figure 4 presents the out-of-sample validation exercise described in Section 4.5 for the
MLE, leave-out, and penalized estimators. We find that the MLE greatly overstates partisanship relative to its out-of-sample counterpart. Based on the in-sample estimate, one
would expect an observer to be able to infer a speaker’s party with considerable accuracy,
but when tested out of sample, the predictive power turns out to be vastly overstated. In
contrast, both the leave-out and penalized estimators achieve values quite close to their
out-of-sample counterparts, as desired.
In Figure 2, the penalized estimates in Panel B imply lower partisanship than the leaveout estimates in Panel A. Sampling experiments in the Supplemental Material show that
the bias in the leave-out estimator is slightly positive, likely due to excluding controls
for covariates, and that the bias in the penalized estimator is negative, possibly due to
conservative overpenalization.
The Supplemental Material presents a range of alternative series based on variants of
our baseline model, estimator, and sample. Removing covariates leads to greater estimated partisanship, while adding more controls or speaker random effects leads to lower
estimated partisanship, though all of these variants imply a large rise in partisanship following the 1990s. Dropping the South from the sample does not meaningfully change the
estimates, nor does excluding data from early decades. Using only the early decades or
holding constant the number of congresspeople in each session somewhat increases our
estimates of partisanship and bias, leaving the difference between the real and random
series in line with our preferred estimates.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1323

FIGURE 4.—Out-of-sample validation. Notes: Let ρ̂t (S ), q̂Rt (S ), and q̂D
t (S ) be functions estimated using
∗
∗D
the maximum likelihood estimator on a sample of speakers S . Let ρ̂t (S ), q̂∗R
t (S ), and q̂t (S ) be functions
estimated using our preferred penalized estimator on sample S and evaluated at the sample mean of the
covariates in session t and sample S . Let S = t (Rt ∪ Dt ) be the full sample of speakers and let S k for
k = 1     K denote K = 5 mutually exclusive partitions (“folds”) of S , with S −k = S \ S
k denoting the
sample excluding the kth fold. For P ∈ {R D}, denote Pkt = S k ∩ Pt and q̃Pt (S k ) = |P1 | i∈Pkt q̂it (S k ).
kt
The lines labeled “in-sample” in Panels A, B, and C present the in-sample estimated partisanship using the maximum likelihood estimator, leave-out estimator, and our preferred penalized estimator. These
are the same as in Figure 1 and Figure 2. The line labeled “out-of-sample” in Panel A presents the
average, across folds, of the out-of-sample estimated partisanship using the maximum likelihood estimaK
tor: K1 k=1 [ 12 q̂Rt (S k ) · ρ̂t (S −k ) + 12 q̂D
t (S k ) · (1 − ρ̂t (S −k ))]. The line labeled “out-of-sample” in Panel B
presents the average, across folds, of the out-of-sample estimated partisanship using the leave-out estimator:
K 1 R
1
1 D
k=1 [ 2 q̃t (S k ) · ρ̂t (S −k ) + 2 q̃t (S k ) · (1 − ρ̂t (S −k ))], which is derived by replacing ρ̂−it (S ) in the in-sample
K
leave-out with its counterpart calculated on the sample excluding the kth fold. The line labeled “out-of-sample” in Panel C presents the average, across folds, of the out-of-sample estimated partisanship using our pre
∗
∗
1 R
1 D
ferred penalized estimator: K1 K
k=1 [ 2 q̂t (S k ) · ρ̂t (S −k ) + 2 q̂t (S k ) · (1 − ρ̂t (S −k ))].

1324

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

6. UNPACKING PARTISANSHIP
6.1. Partisan Phrases
Our model provides a natural way to define the partisanship of an individual phrase.
For an observer with a neutral prior, the expected posterior that a speaker with characteristics xit is Republican is 12 = 12 (qRt (xit ) + qD
t (xit )) · ρt (xit ). If, unbeknownst to the observer,
phrase j is removed from the vocabulary, the change in the expected posterior is
R
D
1 1
(xit )
(xit )
qkt
qkt
ρkt (xit )
−
+
2 2 k=j 1 − qjtR (xit ) 1 − qjtD (xit )

We define the partisanship ζjt of phrase j in session t to be the average of this value
across all active speakers i in session t. This measure has both direction and magnitude:
positive numbers are Republican phrases, negative numbers are Democratic phrases, and
the absolute value gives the magnitude of partisanship.
Table I lists the ten most partisan phrases in every tenth session plus the most recent
session. The Supplemental Material shows the list for all sessions. These lists illustrate
the underlying variation driving our measure, and give a sense of how partisan speech has
changed over time. In the Supplemental Material, we argue in detail that the top phrases
in each of these sessions align closely with the policy positions and narrative strategies
of the parties, confirming that our measure is indeed picking up partisanship rather than
some other dimension that happens to be correlated with it. In this section, we highlight
a few illustrative examples.
The 50th session of Congress (1887–1888) occurred in a period where the cleavages
of the Civil War and Reconstruction Era were still fresh. Republican phrases like “union
soldier” and “confeder soldier” relate to the ongoing debate over provision for veterans, echoing the 1888 Republican platform’s commitment to show “[the] gratitude of the
Nation to the defenders of the Union.” The Republican phrase “color men” reflects the
ongoing importance of racial issues. Many Democratic phrases from this Congress (“increase duti,” “ad valorem,” “high protect,” “tariff tax,” “high tariff”) reflect a debate over
reductions in trade barriers. The 1888 Democratic platform endorses tariff reduction in
its first sentence, whereas the Republican platform says Republicans are “uncompromisingly in favor of the American system of protection.”
The 80th session (1947–1948) convened in the wake of the Second World War. Many
Republican-leaning phrases relate to the war and national defense (“arm forc,” “air forc,”
“coast guard,” “stop communism,” “foreign countri”), whereas “unit nation” is the only
foreign-policy-related phrase in the top ten Democratic phrases in the 80th session. The
1948 Democratic Party platform advocates amending the Fair Labor Standards Act to
raise the minimum wage from 40 to 75 cents an hour (“labor standard,” “standard act,”
“depart labor,” “collect bargain,” “concili servic”).19 By contrast, the Republican platform
of the same year does not mention the Fair Labor Standards Act or the minimum wage.
Language in the 110th session (2007–2008) follows familiar partisan divides. Republicans focus on taxes (“tax increas,” “rais tax,” “tax rate”) and immigration (“illeg immigr”),
while Democrats focus on the aftermath of the war in Iraq (“war iraq”, “troop iraq”) and
19
The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service was created in 1947 and was “given the mission of preventing or minimizing the impact of labor-management disputes on the free flow of commerce by providing
mediation, conciliation and voluntary arbitration” (see https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/our-history/ accessed on
April 15, 2017).

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1325

TABLE I
MOST PARTISAN PHRASES BY SESSIONa
Session 50 (1887–1888)
Republican

#R

sixth street
union soldier
color men
railroad compani
great britain
confeder soldier
other citizen
much get
paper claim
sugar trust

22
0 cutleri compani
33 13 labor cost
27 10 increas duti
85 70 cent ad
121 107 public domain
18
4 ad valorem
13
0 feder court
12
1 high protect
9
0 tariff tax
16
7 high tariff

#D

Democratic

Session 60 (1907–1908)
#R

0
11
11
35
20
61
11
6
11
6

#D Republican

72
37
34
54
39
78
25
18
23
16

postal save
census offic
reserv balanc
war depart
secretari navi
secretari agricultur
pay pension
boat compani
twelfth census
forestri servic

Session 70 (1927–1928)
Republican

#R

#D

war depart
take care
foreign countri
muscl shoal
steam plant
nation guard
air corp
creek dam
cove creek
american ship

97
105
54
97
25
39
32
25
30
29

63
72
28
71
3
18
12
6
13
12

Democratic

pension also
american peopl
radio commiss
spoken drama
civil war
trade commiss
feder trade
wave length
imperi valley
flowag right

#D Republican

0 163 depart agricultur
51 91 foreign countri
8 44 steam plant
0 30 coast guard
27 54 state depart
19 46 air forc
19 45 stop communism
6 25 nation debt
12 28 pay roll
5 20 arm forc

Democratic

#R

#D

3
2
12
39
39
36
2
8
0
7

canal zone
also petit
standard oil
indirect contempt
bureau corpor
panama canal
nation govern
coal mine
revis tariff
feet lake

18
0
4
0
5
23
12
9
8
0

66
47
25
19
24
41
30
27
26
17

#R

#D

#R

#D

67
49
34
34
117
88
22
43
34
63

31
22
7
9
93
69
3
25
17
47

Democratic

unit nation
calumet region
concili servic
labor standard
depart labor
collect bargain
standard act
polish peopl
budget estim
employ servic

119 183
0 30
3 31
16 41
24 46
15 35
11 31
4 20
22 38
25 41

Session 100 (1987–1988)

Republican

#R

#D

Democratic

#R

job corp
trust fund
antelop island
treasuri depart
federalaid highway
tax credit
state depart
oblig author
highway program
invest act

35
26
11
23
13
21
45
14
14
11

20
14
0
12
2
11
35
4
4
1

human right
unit nation
men women
world war
feder reserv
million american
arm forc
high school
gun control
air pollut

7
49
20
57
26
15
25
19
10
18

#D Republican

44
75
34
71
39
27
37
30
22
29

judg bork
freedom fighter
state depart
human right
minimum wage
reserv object
demand second
tax increas
pay rais
plant close

Session 110 (2007–2008)
Democratic

#D

39
31
36
62
62
58
20
24
14
20

Session 80 (1947–1948)
#R

Session 90 (1967–1968)

#R

#D

Democratic

226
36
59
101
37
23
13
20
21
37

14
8
35
78
19
8
1
10
11
28

persian gulf
contra aid
star war
central american
aid contra
nuclear wast
american peopl
interest rate
presid budget
feder reserv

#R

#D

30 47
12 28
1 14
17 30
17 30
14 27
97 109
24 35
11 21
12 22

Session 114 (2015–2016)

Republican

#R

tax increas
natur gas
reserv balanc
rais tax
american energi
illeg immigr
side aisl
continent shelf
outer continent
tax rate

87 20 dog coalit
0 90 american peopl
77 20 war iraq
18 78 al qaeda
147 105 african american
6 62 men women
44 10 american peopl 230 278 side aisl
34
3 oil compani
20 65 human traffick
34
7 civil war
17 45 colleagu support
132 106 troop iraq
11 39 religi freedom
33
8 children health
17 42 taxpay dollar
32
8 nobid contract
0 24 mental health
26
4 middl class
15 39 radic islam

#D

#R

#R

#D Republican

#R

#D

Democratic

327 205 homeland secur
50
7 climat chang
123 83 gun violenc
133 93 african american
60 26 vote right
123 89 public health
34
4 depart homeland
47 19 plan parenthood
59 32 afford care
22
0 puerto rico

#R

#D

96 205
23 94
3 74
11 71
2 62
24 83
48 93
66 104
40 77
42 79

a Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. The table shows the Republican and Democratic
phrases with the greatest magnitude of estimated partisanship ζjt , as defined in Section 6.1, alongside the predicted number of occurrences of each phrase per 100,000 phrases spoken by Republicans or Democrats. Phrases with positive values of ζjt are listed as
Republican and those with negative values are listed as Democratic.

1326

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

social domestic policy (“african american,” “children health,” “middl class”). With regard
to energy policy, Republicans focus on the potential of American energy (“natural gas,”
“american energi,” “outer continent,” “continent shelf”), while Democrats focus on the
role of oil companies (“oil compani”).
The phrases from the 114th session (2015–2016) relate to current partisan cleavages
and echo themes in the 2016 presidential election. Republicans focus on terrorism, discussing “al qaeda” and using the phrase “radic islam,” which echoes Donald Trump’s use
of the phrase “radical Islamic terrorism” during the campaign (Holley (2017)). Democrats
focus on climate change (“climat chang”), civil rights issues (“african american,” “vote
right”), and gun control (“gun violenc”). When discussing public health, Republicans focus on mental health (“mental health”) in correspondence to the Republican-sponsored
“Helping Familes in Mental Health Crisis Act of 2016,” while Democrats focus on public health more broadly (“public health”), health insurance (“afford care”), and women’s
health (“plan parenthood”).
6.2. Partisanship Within and Between Topics
Our baseline measure of partisanship captures changes both in the topics speakers
choose to discuss and in the phrases they use to discuss them. Knowing whether a speech
about taxes includes the phrases “tax relief” or “tax breaks” will help an observer to guess
the speaker’s party; so, too, will knowing whether the speech is about taxes or about the
environment. To separate these, we present a decomposition of partisanship into withinand between-topic components using our 22 manually defined topics.
We define between-topic partisanship to be the posterior that a neutral observer expects to assign to a speaker’s true party when the observer knows only the topic a speaker
chooses, not the particular phrases chosen within the topic. Partisanship within a specific topic is the expected posterior when the vocabulary consists only of phrases in that
topic. The overall within-topic partisanship in a given session is the average of partisanship across all topics, weighting each topic by its frequency of occurrence.
Figure 5 shows that the rise in partisanship is driven mainly by divergence in how the
parties talk about a given substantive topic, rather than by divergence in which topics they
talk about. According to our estimates, choice of topic encodes much less information
about a speaker’s party than does choice of phrase within a topic.
Figure 6 shows estimated partisanship for phrases within each of the 22 topics. Partisanship has increased within many topics in recent years, with the largest increases in the
immigration, crime, and religion topics. Other topics with large increases include taxes,
environmental policy, and minorities. Not all topics have become increasingly partisan in
recent years. For example, alcohol was fairly partisan in the Prohibition Era but is not especially partisan today. Figure 6 also shows that the partisanship of a topic is not strongly
related in general to the frequency with which the topic is discussed. For example, the
world wars are associated with a surge in the frequency of discussion of defense, but not
with an increase in the partisanship of that topic.
To illustrate the underlying variation at the phrase level, Figure 7 shows the evolution
of the partisanship of the four most Republican and Democratic phrases in the “tax,”
“immigration,” and “labor” topics. The plots show that the most partisan phrases become
more informative about a speaker’s party over time. Some phrases, such as “american
taxpay,” have been associated with one party since the 1950s. Others, like “tax relief” and
“minimum wage,” switch between parties before becoming strongly informative about
one party during the 1990s and 2000s. A third group, including “immigr reform” and “job

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1327

FIGURE 5.—Partisanship within and between topics. Notes: Overall average partisanship is from our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. The other two series are based on the same parameter estimates
and use the vocabulary of phrases contained in one of our manually defined topics. Between-topic average partisanship is defined as the expected posterior that an observer with a neutral prior would assign to a speaker’s
true party after learning which of our manually defined topics a speaker’s chosen phrase belongs to. Average
partisanship within a topic is defined as average partisanship if a speaker is required to use phrases in that
topic. Within-topic average partisanship is then the mean of average partisanship across topics, weighting each
topic by its total frequency of occurrence across all sessions.

creator,” is partisan only for a short period when it is relevant to congressional debate.
The Supplemental Material presents similar plots for the other 19 topics.
7. DISCUSSION
What are we to make of the dramatic increase in the partisanship of speech? The pattern we observe suggests our language-based measure captures something quite different
from ideological polarization as usually defined. In Figure 8, we compare our speechbased measure of partisanship to the standard measure of ideological polarization based
on roll-call votes (Carroll et al. (2015a)). The latter is based on an ideal-point model
that places both speakers and legislation in a latent space; polarization is the distance between the average Republican and the average Democrat along the first dimension. Panel
A shows that the dynamics of these two series are very different: though both indicate a
large increase in recent years, the roll-call series is about as high in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth century as it is today, and its current upward trend begins around 1950
rather than 1990. This finding reinforces our expectation that speech and roll-call votes
respond to different incentives and constraints. Roll-call votes may be shaped by strategic
considerations related to the passage of legislation, and may therefore not reflect legislators’ sincere policy preferences. Speech may reflect party differences in values, goals, or
persuasive tactics that are distinct from positions on specific pieces of legislation. And,
related to our discussion below, speech may reflect innovations in rhetoric that have no
counterpart in roll-call votes.
Panel B of Figure 8 shows that a measure of the Republican-ness of an individual’s
speech from our model and the individual Common Space DW-NOMINATE scores

1328

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

FIGURE 6.—Partisanship by topic. Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel
B of Figure 2. Each panel corresponds to a topic. In each panel, for each session, the top (line) plot shows
estimated average partisanship for the given topic, and the bottom (bar) plot shows the share of all speech
that is accounted for by phrases in the given topic. Average partisanship within a topic is defined as average
partisanship if a speaker is required to use phrases in that topic. “All topics” includes all phrases classified into
any of our substantive topics; “other” includes all phrases not classified into any of our substantive topics.

from the roll-call voting data are positively correlated in the cross section. Across all sessions, the correlation between speech and roll-call based partisanship measures is 0537
(p = 0000). After controlling for party, the correlation is 0129 and remains highly statistically significant (p = 0000).20 Thus, members who vote more conservatively also use
more conservative language on average, even though the time-series dynamics of vot20
These correlations are 0.685 (p = 0000) and 0.212 (p = 0000), respectively, when we use data only on
speakers who speak an average of at least 1000 phrases across the sessions in which they speak.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1329

FIGURE 7.—Partisanship over time for phrases within topics. Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred
specification in Panel B of Figure 2. Panel A shows 1000 times the estimated value of phrase partisanship
ζjt , as defined in Section 6.1, for the four Republican (Democratic) phrases in the “tax” topic that have the
highest (lowest) average phrase partisanship across all sessions. The legend lists phrases in descending order
of the magnitude of average phrase partisanship across all sessions. Panels B and C show the same for the
“immigration” and “labor” topics.

1330

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

FIGURE 8.—Partisanship versus roll-call voting. Notes: Panel A shows our preferred estimate of average
partisanship from Panel B of Figure 2 and the difference between the average Republican and the average
Democrat in the first dimension of the Common Space DW-NOMINATE score from McCarty, Poole, and
Rosenthal (2015). Panel B plots each speaker’s posterior probability ρ̂i of being Republican based on speech
against the first dimension of the Common Space DW-NOMINATE score (McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal
(2015)). We drop observations for which we cannot match a DW-NOMINATE score to the speaker. To com∗
pute ρ̂i , we first define ρ̂it = q̂it · ρ̂t (xit ), where we recall that q̂it = cit /mit are the empirical phrase frequencies
∗
for speaker i in session t and where 
we define ρ̂t (xit ) as the estimated value of ρt (xit ) from our baseline penalized estimates. We then let ρ̂i = |T1i | t∈Ti ρ̂it , where Ti is the set of all sessions in which speaker i appears. Nine
outliers are excluded from the plot. The solid black line denotes the linear best fit among the points plotted.

ing and speech are very different. As another way to validate this relationship, we show
in the Supplemental Material that average partisanship exhibits a discontinuity in vote
margin analogous to the discontinuity in vote margin of the non-Common-Space DWNOMINATE scores (Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004), Carroll et al. (2015b)). The Supplemental Material also shows that the divergence in speech between parties in recent

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1331

FIGURE 9.—Possible explanations for the rise in partisanship. Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. Panel A shows average partisanship starting from 1961, the “Communications staff (% of total)” series from Lee (2016a, 2016b) which plots (from 1961 through 2015) the share
of House leadership staffers working in communications, and line markers for select events. Panel B quantifies
partisanship of phrases in the Contract with America. The top (line) plot shows estimated average partisanship
if a speaker is required to use phrases contained in the Contract with America (1994). The bottom (bar) plot
shows the share of all speech that is accounted for by phrases in the Contract in a given session.

years is not matched by an equally large divergence in speech between the more moderate and more extreme wings within each party.
What caused the dramatic increase in the partisanship of speech beginning in the
1990s? We cannot provide a definitive answer, but the timing of the change shown in
Panel A of Figure 9 suggests two natural hypotheses: innovation in political persuasion coinciding with the 1994 Republican takeover of the House of Representatives, and changes
in the media environment including the introduction of live broadcasts of congressional
proceedings on the C-SPAN cable network.

1332

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

The inflection point in the partisanship series occurs around the 104th session (1995–
1996), the first following the 1994 midterm election. This election was a watershed event
in the history of the U.S. Congress. It brought a Republican majority to the House for the
first time in more than forty years, and was the largest net partisan gain since 1948. It “set
off a political earthquake that [would] send aftershocks rumbling through national politics
for years to come” (Jacobson (1996)). The Republicans were led by future Speaker of the
House Newt Gingrich, who succeeded in uniting the party around a platform called the
Contract with America. It specified the actions Republicans would take upon assuming
control, focusing the contest around a set of domestic issues including taxes, crime, and
government efficiency.
Innovation in language and persuasion was, by many accounts, at the center of this
victory. Assisted by the consultant Frank Luntz—who was hired by Gingrich to help craft
the Contract with America, and became famous in significant part because of his role in
the 1994 campaign—the Republicans used focus groups and polling to identify rhetoric
that resonated with voters (Bai (2005)).21 Important technological advances used by Luntz
included instant feedback “dials” that allowed focus group participants to respond to the
content they were hearing in real time.22 Asked in an interview whether “language can
change a paradigm,” Luntz replied:
I don’t believe it—I know it. I’ve seen it with my own eyes    I watched in 1994 when the group of
Republicans got together and said: “We’re going to do this completely differently than it’s ever been
done before.”. . . Every politician and every political party issues a platform, but only these people signed
a contract (Luntz (2004)).

A 2006 memorandum written by Luntz and distributed to Republican congressional
candidates provides detailed advice on the language to use on topics including taxes, budgets, Social Security, and trade (Luntz (2006)).
We can use our data to look directly at the importance of the language in the Contract
with America. We extract all phrases that appear in the text of the Contract and treat them
as a single “topic,” computing both their frequency and their partisanship in each session. Panel B of Figure 9 reports the results. As expected, the frequency of these phrases
spikes in the 104th session (1995–1996). Their partisanship rises sharply in that year and
continues to increase even as their frequency declines.23
In the years after 1994, Democrats sought to replicate what they perceived to have been
a highly successful Republican strategy. George Lakoff, a linguist who advised Democrats,
wrote: “Republican framing superiority had played a major role in their takeover of
Congress in 1994. I and others had hoped that. . . a widespread understanding of how
framing worked would allow Democrats to reverse the trend” (Lakoff (2014)).
The new attention to crafting language coincided with attempts to impose greater
party discipline in speech. In the 101st session (1989–1991), the Democrats established
21

By his own description, Luntz specializes in “testing language and finding words that will help his clients. . .
turn public opinion on an issue or a candidate” (Luntz (2004)). A memo called “Language: A Key Mechanism
of Control” circulated in 1994 to Republican candidates under a cover letter from Gingrich stating that the
memo contained “tested language from a recent series of focus groups” (GOPAC (1994)).
22
Luntz said, “[The dial technology is] like an X-ray that gets inside [the subject’s] head. . . it picks out every
single word, every single phrase [that the subject hears], and you know what works and what doesn’t” (Luntz
(2004)).
23
According to the metric defined in Table I, the most Republican phrases in the 104th session (1995–1996)
that appear in the Contract are “american peopl,” “tax increas,” “term limit,” “lineitem veto,” “tax relief,” “save
account,” “creat job,” “tax credit,” “wast fraud,” and “fiscal respons.” We accessed the text of the Contract at
http://wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/434/445252/DocumentsLibrary/docs/contract.htm on May 18, 2016.

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1333

the “Democratic Message Board” which would “defin[e] a cohesive national Democratic
perspective” (quoted from party documents in Harris (2013)). The “Republican Theme
Team” formed in the 102nd session (1991–1993) sought likewise to “develop ideas and
phrases to be used by all Republicans” (Michel (1993) and quoted in Harris (2013)). Many
scholars of the U.S. Congress find that, over the last few decades, the two parties have increasingly aimed to have a disciplined and centralized strategy for public communication
(Sinclair (2006), Malecha and Reagan (2012), Lee (2016a)). A quantitative signal of this
trend, displayed in Panel A of Figure 9, is the increasing fraction of Congressional leadership staff dedicated to communications roles, a fact that Lee (2016a) attributed in part
to majority control of the chambers becoming more contested.
Consistent with a trend toward greater party discipline in language, the Supplemental
Material shows that the recent increase in partisanship is concentrated in a small minority
of highly partisan phrases. The figure plots quantiles of the estimated average value of the
partisanship of all individual phrases in each session. The plot shows a marked increase in
the partisanship of the highest quantiles, while even the quantiles at 0.9 and 0.99 remain
relatively flat.
In a similar vein, the Supplemental Material shows that a vocabulary consisting of
neologisms—which we define to be phrases first spoken in our data after 1980 (the 96th
session)—exhibits very high and sharply rising partisanship. The figure also shows that a
large increase in partisanship remains even when we exclude neologisms from the choice
set.
Changes in the media environment may also have contributed to the increase in partisanship.24 Prior to the late 1970s, television cameras were only allowed on the floor of
Congress for special hearings and events. With the introduction of the C-SPAN cable
network to the House in 1979, and the C-SPAN2 cable network to the Senate in 1986, every speech was recorded and broadcast live. While live viewership of these networks has
always been limited, they created a video record of speeches that could be used for subsequent press coverage and in candidates’ advertising. This plausibly increased the return
to carefully crafted language, both by widening the reach of successful sound bites, and by
dialing up the cost of careless mistakes.25 The subsequent introduction of the Fox News
cable network and the increasing partisanship of cable news more generally (Martin and
Yurukoglu (2017)) may have further increased this return.
The timing shown in Figure 9 is inconsistent with the C-SPAN networks being the proximate cause of increased partisanship. But it seems likely that they provided an important
complement to linguistic innovation in the 1990s. Gingrich particularly encouraged the
use of “special order” speeches outside of the usual legislative debate protocol, which
allowed congresspeople to speak directly for the benefit of the television cameras. The
importance of television in this period is underscored by Frantzich and Sullivan (1996):
“When asked whether he would be the Republican leader without C-SPAN, Gingrich. . .
[replied] ‘No’. . . C-SPAN provided a group of media-savvy House conservatives in the
mid-1980s with a method of. . . winning a prime-time audience.”
The hypothesis that technological change strengthened the incentive for party discipline in language offers a possible explanation for the very different dynamics of interparty differences in speech and in roll-call voting exhibited in Figure 8.
24

Our discussion of C-SPAN is based on Frantzich and Sullivan (1996).
Mixon, Hobson, and Upadhyaya (2001) and Mixon, Gibson, and Upadhyaya (2003) provided evidence
that the introduction of C-SPAN changed the nature of legislative debate.
25

1334

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

8. CONCLUSION
A consistent theme of much prior literature is that political partisanship today—both in
Congress and among voters—is not that different from what existed in the past (Glaeser
and Ward (2006), Fiorina and Abrams (2008), McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2015)). We
find that language is a striking exception: Democrats and Republicans now speak different
languages to a far greater degree than ever before. The fact that partisan language diffuses
widely through media and public discourse (Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Greenstein
and Zhu (2012), Jensen et al. (2012), Martin and Yurukoglu (2017)) implies that this
could be true not only for congresspeople but for the American electorate more broadly.
Does growing partisanship of language matter? Although measuring the effects of language is beyond the scope of this paper, existing evidence suggests that these effects
could be profound. Laboratory experiments show that varying the way political issues
are “framed” can have large effects on public opinion across a wide range of domains
including free speech (Nelson, Clawson, and Oxley (1997)), immigration (Druckman, Peterson, and Slothuus (2013)), climate change (Whitmarsh (2009)), and taxation (Birney,
Graetz, and Shapiro (2006), Graetz and Shapiro (2006)). Politicians routinely hire consultants to help them craft messages for election campaigns (Johnson (2015)) and policy
debates (Lathrop (2003)), an investment that only makes sense if language matters. Field
studies reveal effects of language on outcomes including marriage (Caminal and Di Paolo
(2019)), political preferences (Clots-Figueras and Masella (2013)), and savings and risk
choices (Chen (2013)).
Language is also one of the most fundamental cues of group identity, with differences in
language or accent producing own-group preferences even in infants and young children
(Kinzler, Dupoux, and Spelke (2007)). Imposing a common language was a key factor in
the creation of a common French identity (Weber (1976)), and Catalan language education has been effective in strengthening a distinct Catalan identity within Spain (ClotsFigueras and Masella (2013)). That the two political camps in the United States increasingly speak different languages may contribute to the striking increase in inter-party hostility evident in recent years (Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes (2012)).
Beyond our substantive findings, we propose a method that can be applied to the many
settings in which researchers wish to characterize differences in behavior between groups
and the space of possible choices is high-dimensional. To illustrate the range of such settings in the political domain, the Supplemental Material uses survey data to characterize
the bias in plug-in estimates of the partisanship of respondents’ choice of residential location, websites, and television programs, for various sample sizes.
APPENDIX: RATE OF CONVERGENCE OF PENALIZED MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD
ESTIMATOR
Let θ be a vector that stacks the parameters (αt  γ t  ϕt ), and write θ0 for its true value.
Let C be a matrix that stacks the matrices Ct , adding a row of zeros for speakers who
are inactive in a given session. The matrix C then has dimension NT × J, where N is the
number of unique speakers, T is the number of unique sessions, and recall that J is the
number of unique phrases. All limits are with respect to N.
Define the negative log likelihood for (1) and (2) as

L(θ C) =

T 
N



mit log

i=1 t=1


j

exp(uijt ) −


j


cijt uijt 

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1335

Now define θ̂ to minimize the objective

L(θ C) +



λNj



|ϕjt |

t

j

where λNj ≥ 0 is a data-dependent penalty. Let
FN = L (θ0  C)
be the matrix of second derivatives of the negative log likelihood evaluated at the true
value θ0 .
√ p
PROPOSITION 1: If (i) FN /N → F for some positive definite matrix F, and (ii) λNj / N →
λ0j ≥ 0 for all j, then
√
d
N(θ̂ − θ0 ) → θ̃
where θ̃ is a random variable with a non-degenerate distribution.
PROOF: The proof follows Knight and Fu (2000). Let a denote a vector whose dimensions match θ. We will write aϕjt to denote the element matching ϕjt . Now define a datadependent function VN (·) with
√

VN (a) = L(θ0 + a/ N C) − L(θ0  C)


√   
ϕ0 + aϕjt / N  − ϕ0  
+
λNj
jt
jt
t

j

The function VN (a) is minimized at
â =

√

N(θ̂ − θ0 )

By (i), the first term in VN (a) converges in distribution to
1
a w − a Fa
2
where
w ∼ N(0 F)
By (ii), the second term in VN (a) converges in probability to

j

λ0j



 
aϕjt sgn ϕ0jt 1ϕ0jt =0 + |aϕjt |1ϕ0jt =0 

t

Therefore,
d

VN (a) → V (a)

1336

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

where
1
V (a) = a w − a Fa
2
 
 
aϕjt sgn ϕ0jt 1ϕ0jt =0 + |aϕjt |1ϕ0jt =0 
λ0j
+
t

j

Because VN (·) is convex and V (·) has a unique minimum, we have that
√
d
N(θ̂ − θ0 ) → arg min V (a)
a

Q.E.D.

which is non-degenerate as desired.

COROLLARY 2: Write average partisanship π t (θ) as a function of the parameter θ. Then,
under the conditions of Proposition 1, for each t,
√ 
 d
N π t (θ̂) − π t (θ0 ) → π̃
where π̃ is a random variable with a non-degenerate distribution that depends on t.
p

PROOF: First note that Proposition 1 implies that θ̂ → θ0 . Because π t (·) is continuous
and differentiable, we can write that
π t (θ̂) − π t (θ0 ) = ∇θ π t (θ̂ − θ0 )
where θ is a mean value. The rest follows from standard limit results.

Q.E.D.

REMARK 3: Corollary 2 implies that
√ π t (θ̂) satisfies Assumption 2.2.1 of Politis, Romano, and Wolf (1999), with τN = N. It then follows by Theorem 2.1.1 and Remark
2.2.1 of Politis, Romano, and Wolf (1999) that if we choose subsets of size B → ∞ with
B/N → 0, subsampling-based confidence intervals on π t (θ̂) will have asymptotically correct coverage.
REFERENCES
ALCALDE-UNZU, J., AND M. VORSATZ (2013): “Measuring the Cohesiveness of Preferences: An Axiomatic
Analysis,” Social Choice and Welfare, 41 (4), 965–988. [1310]
ALLEN, R., S. BURGESS, R. DAVIDSON, AND F. WINDMEIJER (2015): “More Reliable Inference for the Dissimilarity Index of Segregation,” Econometrics Journal, 18 (1), 40–66. [1310]
AMER, M. L. (1993): “The Congressional Record; Content, History, and Issues,” Washington DC: Congressional Research Service. CRS Report No. 93-60 GOV. [1311]
ANDREWS, W., AND L. BUCHANAN (2016): “Mass Shooting or Terrorist Attack? Depends on Your
Party,” New York Times, June 13, 2016. Accessed at http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/06/13/
us/politics/politicians-respond-to-orlando-nightclub-attack.html on June 24, 2016. [1308]
ANTWEILER, W., AND M. Z. FRANK (2004): “Is All That Talk Just Noise? The Information Content of Internet
Stock Message Boards,” Journal of Finance, 59 (3), 1259–1294. [1309]
BAI, M. (2005): “The Framing Wars,” New York Times, July 17, 2005. Accessed at http://www.nytimes.com/
2005/07/17/magazine/the-framing-wars.html on June 16, 2016. [1308,1309,1332]
BAKER, S. G. (1994): “The Multinomial-Poisson Transformation,” The Statistician, 495–504. [1316]
BALL, M. (2013): “Don’t Call It’ Gun Control’,” The Atlantic, January 16, 2013. Accessed at
https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/01/dont-call-it-gun-control/267259/ on July 23, 2018.
[1308]

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1337

BALLESTER, C., AND M. VORSATZ (2014): “Random Walk-Based Segregation Measures,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 96 (3), 383–401. [1310]
BAYER, P., R. MCMILLAN, AND K. RUEBEN (2002): “An Equilibrium Model of Sorting in an Urban Housing
Market: A Study of the Causes and Consequences of Residential Segregation,” NBER Working Paper No.
10865. [1310]
BERTRAND, M., AND E. KAMENICA (2018): “Coming Apart? Cultural Distances in the United States Over
Time,” Report, University of Chicago. [1307]
BIRNEY, M., M. J. GRAETZ, AND I. SHAPIRO (2006): “Public Opinion and the Push to Repeal the Estate Tax,”
National Tax Journal, 59 (3), 439–461. [1334]
BLEI, D. M., AND J. D. LAFFERTY (2007): “A Correlated Topic Model of Science,” The Annals of Applied
Statistics, 17–35. [1309]
CAMINAL, R., AND A. DI PAOLO (2019): “Your Language or Mine? The Noncommunicative Benefits of Language Skills,” Economic Inquiry, 57 (1), 726–750. [1334]
CARRINGTON, W. J., AND K. R. TROSKE (1997): “On Measuring Segregation in Samples With Small Units,”
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 15 (4), 402–409. [1310]
CARROLL, R., J. LEWIS, J. LO, N. MCCARTY, K. POOLE, AND H. ROSENTHAL (2015a): “‘Common Space’
DW-NOMINATE Scores With Bootstrapped Standard Errors,” Accessed at http://www.voteview.com/
dwnomin_joint_house_and_senate.htm on November 18, 2016. [1311,1327]
(2015b): “DW-NOMINATE Scores With Bootstrapped Standard Errors,” Accessed at
http://www.voteview.com/dwnomin.htm on March 30, 2017. [1311,1330]
CHANDRA, A., D. CUTLER, AND Z. SONG (2012): “Who Ordered That? The Economics of Treatment Choices
in Medical Care,” in Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 2, ed. by M. V. Pauly, T. G. McGuire, and P. P.
Barros. Amsterdam: Elsevier. [1307]
CHATTERJEE, A., AND S. N. LAHIRI (2011): “Bootstrapping Lasso Estimators,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 106 (494), 608–625. [1318]
CHEN, M. K. (2013): “The Effect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence From Savings Rates, Health
Behaviors, and Retirement Assets,” American Economic Review, 103 (2), 690–731. [1334]
CHONG, D., AND J. N. DRUCKMAN (2007): “Framing Public Opinion in Competitive Democracies,” American
Political Science Review, 101 (4), 637–655. [1308]
CLOTS-FIGUERAS, I., AND P. MASELLA (2013): “Education, Language and Identity,” The Economic Journal,
123 (570), F332–F357. [1334]
CORTESE, C. F., R. F. FALK, AND J. K. COHEN (1976): “Further Considerations on the Methodological Analysis
of Segregation Indices,” American Sociological Review, 41 (4), 630–637. [1310]
CUTLER, D. M., E. L. GLAESER, AND J. L. VIGDOR (1999): “The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto,”
Journal of Political Economy, 107 (3), 455–506. [1314]
DAVIS, D., J. I. DINGEL, J. MONRAS, AND E. MORALES (2019): “How Segregated Is Urban Consumption?”
Journal of Political Economy, 127 (4). [1310]
D’HAULTFŒUILLE, X., AND R. RATHELOT (2017): “Measuring Segregation on Small Units: A Partial Identification Analysis,” Quantitative Economics, 8, 39–73. [1310]
DRUCKMAN, J. N., E. PETERSON, AND R. SLOTHUUS (2013): “How Elite Partisan Polarization Affects Public
Opinion Formation,” American Political Science Review, 107 (1), 57–79. [1334]
ECHENIQUE, F., AND R. G. FRYER JR. (2007): “A Measure of Segregation Based on Social Interactions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2), 441–485. [1310]
ECONOMIST (2013): “The War of the Words,” The Economist, July 13, 2013. Accessed at https://www.
economist.com/united-states/2013/07/13/the-war-of-the-words on July 23, 2018. [1308]
ELLISON, G., AND E. L. GLAESER (1997): “Geographic Concentration in US Manufacturing Industries:
A Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 105 (5), 889–927. [1310]
FIORINA, M. P., AND S. J. ABRAMS (2008): “Political Polarization in the American Public,” Annual Review of
Political Science, 11, 563–588. [1334]
FLAXMAN, S., S. GOEL, AND J. RAO (2016): “Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News Consumption,”
Public Opinion Quarterly, 80, 298–320. [1307]
FOSSETT, M. (2011): “Generative Models of Segregation: Investigating Model-Generated Patterns of Residential Segregation by Ethnicity and Socioeconomic Status,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 35 (1–3),
114–145. [1310]
FRANKEL, D. M., AND O. VOLIJ (2011): “Measuring School Segregation,” Journal of Economic Theory, 146 (1),
1–38. [1310,1314]
FRANTZICH, S., AND J. SULLIVAN (1996): The C-SPAN Revolution. Norman OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
[1333]

1338

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

GENTZKOW, M., AND J. M. SHAPIRO (2010): “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence From U.S. Daily Newspapers,” Econometrica, 78 (1), 35–71. [1308,1309,1312,1334]
(2011): “Ideological Segregation Online and Offline,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (4), 1799–
1839. [1307]
GENTZKOW, M., B. T. KELLY, AND M. TADDY “Text as Data,” Journal of Economic Literature (Forthcoming).
[1312]
GENTZKOW, M., J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY (2017): “Measuring Polarization in High-Dimensional Data:
Method and Application to Congressional Speech,” NBER Working Paper No. 22423. [1310]
(2019): “Supplement to ‘Measuring Group Differences in High-Dimensional Choices: Method and
Application to Congressional Speech’,” Econometrica Supplemental Material, 87, https://doi.org/10.3982/
ECTA16566. [1311]
GINGRICH, N., AND D. ARMEY (1994): Contract With America. [1309]
GLAESER, E. L., AND B. A. WARD (2006): “Myths and Realities of American Political Geography,” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 20 (2), 119–144. [1334]
GOPAC (1994): “Language: A Key Mechanism of Control. Memo,” Accessed at http://fair.org/extra/languagea-key-mechanism-of-control/ on March 30, 2017. [1332]
GRAETZ, M. J., AND I. SHAPIRO (2006): Death by a Thousand Cuts: The Fight Over Taxing Inherited Wealth.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. [1308,1334]
GREENSTEIN, S., AND F. ZHU (2012): “Is Wikipedia Biased?” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings., 102 (3), 343–348. [1308,1334]
GRIMMER, J. (2010): “A Bayesian Hierarchical Topic Model for Political Texts: Measuring Expressed Agendas
in Senate Press Releases,” Political Analysis, 18 (1), 1–35. [1309]
GROSECLOSE, T., AND J. MILYO (2005): “A Measure of Media Bias,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (4),
1191–1237. [1309,1313]
HAAS, K. L. (2015): “Rules of the House of Representatives—One Hundred Fourteenth Congress,” Accessed
at http://clerk.house.gov/legislative/house-rules.pdf on March 1, 2017. [1311]
HABERMAN, S. J. (1973): “Log-Linear Models for Frequency Data: Sufficient Statistics and Likelihood Equations,” Annals of Statistics, 1 (4), 617–632. [1317]
HARRIS, D. B. (2013): “Let’s Play Hardball: Congressional Partisanship in the Television Era,” in Politics to the
Extreme: American Political Institutions in the Twenty-First Century, ed. by S. A. Frisch and S. Q. Kelly. New
York: Palgrave MacMillan, 93–115. [1333]
HOLLEY, P. (2017): “Radical Islamic Terrorism: Three Words That Separate Trump From Most of
Washington,” Washington Post, March 1, 2017. Accessed at https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/thefix/wp/2017/02/28/radical-islamic-terrorism-three-words-that-separate-trump-from-most-ofwashington/?utm term=.055e7d927bcf on May 15, 2017. [1326]
INTER-UNIVERSITY CONSORTIUM FOR POLITICAL AND SOCIAL RESEARCH (ICPSR) AND C. MCKIBBIN
(1997): “Roster of United States Congressional Officeholders and Biographical Characteristics of Members of the United States Congress, 1789–1996: Merged Data,” ICPSR07803-v10. ICPSR Study No. 7803.
Accessed at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/7803 on March 1, 2017. [1311]
ISSENBERG, S. (2012): “The Death of the Hunch,” Slate, May 22, 2012. Accessed at consistently http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/victory_lab/2012/05/obama_campaign_ads_how_the_
analyst_institute_is_helping_him_hone_his_message_.html on June 16, 2016. [1308]
IYENGAR, S., G. SOOD, AND Y. LELKES (2012): “Affect, not Ideology a Social Identity Perspective of Polarization,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 76 (3), 405–431. [1334]
JACOBSON, G. C. (1996): “The 1994 House Elections in Perspective,” Political Science Quaterly, 111 (2), 203–
223. [1332]
JENSEN, J., S. NAIDU, E. KAPLAN, AND L. WILSE-SAMSON (2012): “Political Polarization and the Dynamics of
Political Language: Evidence From 130 Years of Partisan Speech,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1–81. [1308-1310,1315,1318-1320,1334]
JOHNSON, C. W. (1997): “House Rules and Manual—One Hundred Fifth Congress,” Washington DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office. H. Doc. no. 104-272. [1311]
JOHNSON, D. W. (2015): Political consultants and American elections: Hired to fight, hired to win. Routledge.
[1334]
KIM, I. S., J. LONDREGAN, AND M. RATKOVIC, (2018): “Estimating Ideal Points From Votes and Text,” Political
Analysis, 26 (2), 210–229. [1309]
KING, G. (1995): “Elections to the United States House of Representatives, 1898–1992. ICPSR Version,”
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research. Accessed at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/
icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/6311 on April 7, 2017. [1311]

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES

1339

KINZLER, K. D., E. DUPOUX, AND E. S. SPELKE (2007): “The Native Language of Social Cognition,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104 (30), 12577–12580. [1334]
KNIGHT, K., AND W. FU (2000): “Asymptotics for Lasso-Type Estimators,” The Annals of Statistics, 28 (5),
1356–1378. [1318,1335]
LAKOFF, G. (2003): “Framing the Issues: UC Berkeley Professor George Lakoff Tells How Conservatives Use Language to Dominate Politics,” UC Berkeley News, October 27, 2003. Accessed at
http://www.berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2003/10/27_lakoff.shtml on June 16, 2016. [1308]
(2004): “Don’t Think of an Elephant! Know Your Values and Frame the Debate the Essential Guide
for Progressives,” White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green. [1309]
(2014): “The All New Don’t Think of an Elephant!: Know Your Values and Frame the Debate,”
White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green. [1332]
LATHROP, D. A. (2003): “The Campaign Continues: How Political Consultants and Campaign Tactics Affect
Public Policy,” ABC-CLIO. [1334]
LAUDERDALE, B. E., AND A. HERZOG (2016): “Measuring Political Positions From Legislative Speech,” Political Analysis, 24 (3), 374–394. [1310]
LAVER, M., K. BENOIT, AND J. GARRY (2003): “Extracting Policy Positions From Political Texts Using Words
as Data,” American Political Science Review, 97 (2), 311–331. [1309]
LEE, D. S., E. MORETTI, AND M. J. BUTLER (2004): “Do Voters Affect or Elect Policies? Evidence From the
U.S,” House. Quarterly Journal of Economics., 119 (3), 807–859. [1330]
LEE, F. (2016a): “Legislative Parties in an Era of Alternating Majorities. Chapter,” in Governing in a Polarized Age: Elections, Parties, and Political Representation in America, ed. by A. S. Gerber and E. Schickler.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 115–142. [1331,1333]
(2016b): Insecure Majorities: Congress and the Perpetual Campaign. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press. [1331]
LOGAN, J. R., A. FOSTER, J. KE, AND F. LI (2018): “The Uptick in Income Segregation: Real Trend or Random
Sampling Variation?” American Journal of Sociology, 124 (1), 185–222. [1310]
LUNTZ, F. I. (2004): “Interview Frank Luntz,” Frontline, November 9, 2004. Accessed at http://www.pbs.
org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/persuaders/interviews/luntz.html on June 16, 2016. [1309,1332]
(2006): “The New American Lexicon,” Luntz Research Companies. Accessed at
https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B_2I29KBujFwNWY2MzZmZjctMjdmOS00ZGRhLWEyY2MtMGE1MD
MyYzVjYWM2/view on June 16, 2016. [1308,1332]
MALECHA, G. L., AND D. J. REAGAN (2012): The Public Congress: Congressional Deliberation in a New Media
Age. New York, NY: Routledge. [1333]
MARTIN, G. J., AND A. YURUKOGLU (2017): “Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization,” American
Economic Review, 107 (9), 2565–2599. [1308,1333,1334]
MARTIS, K. C. (1989): The Historical Atlas of Political Parties in the United States Congress, 1789–1989. New
York: Macmillan Publishing Company. [1311]
MCCARDELL, J. M. JR. (2004): “Reflections on the Civil War,” Sewanee Review, 122 (2), 295–303. [1308]
MCCARTY, N., K. POOLE, AND H. ROSENTHAL (2015): “The Polarization of Congressional Parties,” Voteview,
March 21, 2015. Accessed at http://voteview.com/political_polarization_2014.html on June 16, 2016. [1309,
1330,1334]
MELE, A. (2013): “Poisson Indices of Segregation,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43 (1), 65–85.
[1310]
(2017): “A Structural Model of Segregation in Social Networks,” Econometrica, 85 (3), 825–850.
[1310]
MICHEL, R. H. (1993): “The Theme Team,” Accessed at http://www.robertmichel.name/RHM_blueprint/
blueprint_Theme%20Team.pdf on June 16, 2016. [1333]
MIXON, F. G. JR., M. T. GIBSON, AND K. P. UPADHYAYA (2003): “Has Legislative Television Changed Legislator
Behavior? C-SPAN2 and the Frequency of Senate Filibustering,” Public Choice, 115 (1), 139–162. [1333]
MIXON, F. G. JR., D. L. HOBSON, AND K. P. UPADHYAYA (2001): “Gavel-to-Gavel Congressional Television
Coverage as Political Advertising: The Impact of C-SPAN on Legislative Sessions,” Economic Inquiry, 39
(3), 351–364. [1333]
MOSTELLER, F., AND D. L. WALLACE (1963): “Inference in an Authorship Problem,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 58 (302), 275–309. [1309]
NELSON, T. E., R. A. CLAWSON, AND Z. M. OXLEY (1997): “Media Framing of a Civil Liberties Conflict and
Its Effect on Tolerance,” American Political Science Review, 91 (3), 567–583. [1308,1334]
ORWELL, G. (1946): “Politics and the English Language,” Horizon, 13 (76), 252–265. [1308]
PALMGREN, J. (1981): “The Fisher Information Matrix for log Linear Models Arguing Conditionally on Observed Explanatory Variables,” Biometrika, 68 (2), 563–566. [1316]

1340

M. GENTZKOW, J. M. SHAPIRO, AND M. TADDY

PETERSON, A., AND A. SPIRLING (2018): “Classification Accuracy as a Substantive Quantity of Interest: Measuring Polarization in Westminster Systems,” Political Analysis, 26, 120–128. [1310]
POLITIS, D. N., J. P. ROMANO, AND M. WOLF (1999): Subsampling. New York: Springer Series in Statistics.
[1317,1319,1321,1336]
POOLE, K. T., AND H. ROSENTHAL (1985): “A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call Analysis,” American
Journal of Political Science, 29 (2), 357–384. [1309]
PORTER, M. (2009): “The English (Porter2) Stemming Algorithm,” Accessed at http://snowball.tartarus.org/
algorithms/english/stemmer.html on March 31, 2017. [1312]
RATHELOT, R. (2012): “Measuring Segregation When Units Are Small: A Parametric Approach,” Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics, 30 (4), 546–553. [1310]
REARDON, S. F., AND G. FIREBAUGH (2002): “Measures of Multigroup Segregation,” Sociological Methodology, 32 (1), 33–67. [1307,1310]
SANTOS SILVA, J. M. C., AND S. TENREYRO (2010): “On the Existence of the Maximum Likelihood Estimates
in Poisson Regression,” Economics Letters, 107 (2), 310–312. [1317]
SINCLAIR, B. (2006): Party Wars: Polarization and the Politics of National Policy Making. Norman, OK: University
of Oklahoma Press. [1333]
TADDY, M. (2013): “Multinomial Inverse Regression for Text Analysis,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 108 (503), 755–770. [1309,1313]
(2015): “Distributed Multinomial Regression,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, 9 (3), 1394–1414.
[1309,1313,1316,1317]
TETLOCK, P. C. (2007): “Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the Stock Market,”
Journal of Finance, 62 (3), 1139–1168. [1309]
TIBSHIRANI, R. (1996): “Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso,” Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series B (Methodological), 58 (1), 267–288. [1317]
WEBER, E. (1976): Peasants Into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France 1870–1914. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press. [1334]
WHITE, M. J. (1986): “Segregation and Diversity Measures in Population Distribution,” Population Index, 52
(2), 198–221. [1314]
WHITMARSH, L. (2009): “What’s in a Name? Commonalities and Differences in Public Understanding of
“Climate Change” and “Global Warming”,” Public Understanding of Science, 18 (4), 401–420. [1334]
YAN, H., S. DAS, A. LAVOIE, S. LI, AND B. SINCLAIR (2018): “The Congressional Classification Challenge:
Domain Specificity and Partisan Intensity,” Washington University of St. Louis Working Paper. Accessed at
https://www.cse.wustl.edu/~sanmay/papers/partisanship-from-text.pdf on January 11, 2019. [1309]
ZOU, H., T. HASTIE, AND R. TIBSHIRANI (2007): “On the “Degrees of Freedom” of the Lasso,” Annals of
Statistics, 35 (5), 2173–2192. [1317]

Co-editor Fabrizio Zilibotti handled this manuscript.
Manuscript received 3 August, 2018; final version accepted 27 March, 2019; available online 3 April, 2019.

