CHAPTER 10

Lab in the Field: Measuring
Preferences in the Wild
U. Gneezy*, x, 1, A. Imas{
*University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States
x
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
{
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
1
Corresponding author: E-mail: ugneezy@ucsd.edu

Contents
1. Theoretically-Relevant Populations
2. Using Lab-in-the Field for Collecting Covariates as Complements to
RCTs and for Targeting Policy
3. Comparing Between Contexts and Cultures
4. External Validity
5. Conclusion
References

441
445
452
456
459
461

Abstract
In this chapter, we discuss the “lab-in-the-ﬁeld” methodology, which combines elements of both lab
and ﬁeld experiments in using standardized, validated paradigms from the lab in targeting relevant
populations in naturalistic settings. We begin by examining how the methodology has been used
to test economic models with populations of theoretical interest. Next, we outline how lab-in-the-ﬁeld
studies can be used to complement traditional randomized control trials in collecting covariates to test
theoretical predictions and explore behavioral mechanisms. We proceed to discuss how the methodology can be utilized to compare behavior across cultures and contexts, and test for the external validity of results obtained in the lab. The chapter concludes with an overview of lessons on how to use
the methodology effectively.

Keywords
Experimental economics; Field experiments; Laboratory experiments; Risk preferences; Social
preferences; Time preferences

JEL Codes
B40; C91; C92; C93; D01; D03

Lab experiments and ﬁeld experiments differ on several core dimensions. Lab experiments are typically conducted in environments that attempt to abstract from the naturalistic setting where individuals typically make their decisions. Factors orthogonal to the
theoretical problem being studied such as context and background are removed so
Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Volume 1
ISSN 2214-658X, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.hefe.2016.08.003

© 2017 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

439

440

Handbook of Field Experiments

that the experimenter can maintain tight control and eliminate potential confounds from
the study. These experiments are typically conducted on university campuses with
convenient populations of students who are aware that their actions are being studied.
While the high level of experimenter control has beneﬁts such as reducing noise and
ease of replicability, abstracting from the naturalistic setting and using student populations
brings into question whether students in the lab making abstract decisions are a good representation of the types of decisions made by individuals actually relevant to the economic theory.
We have learned quite a lot from carefully designed experiments that impose a strict
structure on decision-making. Yet, it is important to explore how individuals’ preferences in theoretically relevant settings shape behavior. When studying performance under different incentive schemes, output on a real-effort task could be a more appropriate
measure than an induced value design.1 Similarly, manipulating incentives for charitable
giving with actual donors to study social preferences may yield more insightful results for
charities than the same manipulation in an anonymous giving game in the lab.2
Field experiments are conducted in naturalistic environments and typically use
a nonstudent population that is not aware that their decisions are being studied. By targeting a population of theoretical interest in its natural environment, the experimenter can be
more conﬁdent that the results are applicable to the relevant context. However, ﬁeld experiments sacriﬁce experimenter control that may inject noise into the data and introduce
potential confounds that bias the results. It is also harder to replicate results from ﬁeld experiments as they are often inherently situation speciﬁc. Replicating a dictator game in the
university lab with student participants is easier than replicating the same game with a tribe
in a remote area. This situation-speciﬁc element also makes it difﬁcult to generalize the
results and make direct comparisons to other environments and populations.
In this chapter, we discuss a methodology termed “lab-in-the-ﬁeld” and argue that by
combining elements of both lab and ﬁeld experiments, it provides researchers with a tool
that has the beneﬁts of both, while minimizing the respective costs. We deﬁne a lab-inthe-ﬁeld study as one conducted in a naturalistic environment targeting the theoretically
relevant population but using a standardized, validated lab paradigm. Targeting the relevant population and setting increases the applicability of the results. Employing a standardized paradigm permits the experimenter to maintain tight control, while allowing
for direct comparisons across contexts and populations. Importantly, the use of lab-inthe-ﬁeld is an important additional tool in understanding preferences in the wild that
could be employed alongside traditional ﬁeld work.
1

2

See Fehr et al. (1998) and Gneezy and List (2006) for the qualitative difference in effort and reciprocity depending on
methodology used.
See Andreoni and Miller (2002) and Karlan and List (2007) for qualitative differences in price sensitivities in giving
depending on the methodology used.

Lab in the Field

In some cases, the method that we consider is similar to that of Harrison and List
(2004). According to their taxonomy, lab-in-the-ﬁeld is a type of ﬁeld experiment.
What we call lab-in-the-ﬁeld using nonstandard populations is similar in spirit to what
they termed an artefactual ﬁeld experiment, which they deﬁne as “.the same as a conventional lab experiment but with a nonstandard subject pool.” As an example of such
artefactual ﬁeld experiment, Harrison and List (2004) discuss the paper by Harrison
et al. (2002) who use a standard lab experiment but instead of running it at a university
run it in hotels in order to be able to attract a representative sample of the Danish population. Following Charness et al. (2013), we argue that the physical location of the lab is
not what deﬁnes a method, and laboratory experiments that are run outside of the university are not best described as ﬁeld experiments.
While there is no clear cut difference here between lab experiments and lab in the
ﬁeld, we argue that the population itself does not make a study a ﬁeld experiment.
For example, Cappelen et al. (2015) conducted a social preference experiment with a
representative population in their lab. In our classiﬁcation, that would be a lab experiment. According to Harrison and List (2004), this would be an artefactual ﬁeld
experiment.

1. THEORETICALLY-RELEVANT POPULATIONS
One of the limitations of standard experiments in the lab is the use of a narrow set of participants, typically university students, with similar cognitive abilities, low variance in age,
education, income, etc. A natural concern is whether results obtained in this speciﬁc population would be representative of behavior in a more relevant population. Henrich et al.
(2010) argue that participants in laboratory experiments are typically drawn from
Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) societies, and results
obtained from such studies may not generalize to other populations and settings. For
example, in fairness and social preference experiments, WEIRD subjects tend to be
more generous and make fewer income maximizing offers than participants drawn
from other societies.
The issue of generalizability is particularly important for using experimental data for
informing economic theory. For example, economic models of ﬁnancial decision making
such as of asset pricing and household consumption and saving were often developed to
capture the behavior of market participants like ﬁnance professionals (e.g., traders) and
individuals investing to save for retirement. Experiments to test these models in the
lab typically used a convenient sample of undergraduates and implicitly assumed that
behavior in the lab would generalize to the relevant population of experienced traders
and ﬁnancial market participants.
Locke and Mann (2005) discuss the applicability of studying behavior of nonprofessional traders in the context of information cascades and herd behavior in ﬁnancial

441

442

Handbook of Field Experiments

decisions, stating that individuals without experience in ﬁnancial markets are too far
removed from the price discovery process and may therefore behave differently than
the population of market professionals. In the paper, the authors study the disposition
effectdthe tendency to hold on to losing stocks longer than winning stocksdin a
population of professional traders and retail traders. Although they ﬁnd that both groups
display a pronounced disposition effect, the former group does not suffer ﬁnancial
losses as a result whereas the latter group does. This discrepancy in how a well-studied
behavioral phenomenon effects different populations is taken as evidence for the importance of studying the theoretically relevant population rather than a convenient sample.
Theorists examining herding and information cascades similarly argue that to examine
herding behavior requires a population of individuals “who trade actively and act similarly” (Bikhchandani and Sharma, 2000).
Alevy et al. (2007) aimed to address this issue by comparing behavior of market professionals and undergraduate students in a paradigm typically used to study information
cascades and herding (Anderson and Holt, 1997). In this setting, individuals make decisions based on a noisy private signal and a public signal based on the behavior of others
who faced the same decision before them. Cascades are said to form when individuals
ignore their private signal to follow the public signal and can be either statistically justiﬁed
or not depending on the quality of the public and private signals. Students were recruited
for a lab study on a university campus, while traders participated in the experiment at the
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT). The behavior in the experiment differed signiﬁcantly
between the two populations. Market professionals were more likely to use their private
signal and were more sensitive to the quality of the public signal, making better use of it
than the undergraduates. In turn, the professionals were involved in (weakly) fewer cascades overall and signiﬁcantly fewer suboptimal cascades (reverse cascades).
But professionals do not always “ﬁx” biases. In a similar vein to the information
cascade study, Haigh and List (2005) compared the propensity of market professionals
(traders on the CBOT) and students to exhibit myopic loss aversion. Myopic loss aversion, which combines two behavioral concepts of loss aversion and mental accounting,
predicts that people will take on more risk over a sequence of gambles than when the
same gambles are presented in isolation (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995). It has been proposed
as an explanation for the equity premium puzzle, suggesting that the high risk premium
on stocks is due to traders evaluating asset performance over too narrow of a frame. Using
a standard laboratory paradigm from the myopic loss aversion literature (Gneezy and
Potters, 1997), Haigh and List (2005) found that rather than displaying less myopic
loss aversion than the students, traders were even more likely to take on greater risk
when gambles were framed together rather than separately.
Both papers offer insight on the extent to which behavior of relevant populations
differ from convenient populations typically used in lab experiments. The results of using
the lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology in these cases suggest that the students were not

Lab in the Field

qualitatively different than the relevant population and offer a step in the direction of
showing the degree to which behavioral phenomena were applicable outside of the student population.
Policy is often designed to target a speciﬁc population. For example, initiatives such as
Medicare Part D are aimed at improving the healthcare outcomes of retirees while programs to increase student retention and the development of human capital are targeted
towards young children and adolescents. For these policies to be effective, it is important
to examine how the preferences of these populations differ from those assumed in standard economic theory.
In the tradition of developmental psychology, Harbaugh et al. (2001) examine the
question of whether age and greater market experience mitigates behavioral phenomena
such as the endowment effectdthe gap in valuations of a good between buyers and
sellers. If age and market experience brings behavior closer to the predictions of the neoclassical model, then adults are expected to show a lower gap than children. The participants in the experiment were kindergarten children and undergraduates enrolled in an
introductory economics class. Using the standard paradigm of Knetsch (1989), participants were randomly endowed with one of two objects and then asked whether they
would like to keep the object or trade it for the other. The school-aged students
made choices between different goods than the college students: the former kept or
traded toys and school supplies while the latter made choices over chocolates and coffee
mugs. The main ﬁnding was no difference in the propensity to choose the endowed item
between the age groups, suggesting that exposure to markets between kindergarten and
college does not diminish this behavioral phenomenon.
In a paper titled “GARP for Kids,” Harbaugh et al. (2001) further studied the relationship between age and rationality by presenting groups of children aged 7 and 11
and undergraduate students with a series of choices between bundles of goods while varying relative prices and budget. Andreoni and Miller (2002) have previously used this
experimental paradigm in a standard lab setup to test whether preferences are transitive
and consistent with the Generalized Axiom of Revealed Preference (GARP). The
authors ﬁnd that children as young as seven already display a high degree of choices
consistent with GARP. By age 11 years, the choices of children appear just as consistent
as those of adult undergraduates, suggesting that models of economic behavior can be
applied to children as well as adults.
The study of social preferences is a rapidly growing literature in economics. Several
models (see Charness and Kuhn, 2011 for a recent survey) aim to capture the systematic
violations of the purely selﬁsh, money-maximizing actor, which used to be a typical
assumption in neoclassical economics. People have been observed to share money
with strangers (Forsythe et al., 1994), sacriﬁce money by rejecting unfair offers in ultimatum bargaining games (Guth et al., 1982), and cooperate with others even in one-shot
interactions (Andreoni, 1989).

443

444

Handbook of Field Experiments

However, an important question for both theory and policy is when such social preferences develop. Fehr et al. (2008) sought to answer this question by examining the allocation decisions of young children. Groups of children aged 3e4, 5e6, and 7e8 at local
preschools and elementary schools participated in the study. Each child was paired with
another and asked to make decisions on how to allocate candy between themselves and
their partner in three games. In the prosocial game, the child chose whether to receive
one candy and give nothing to their partner, (1, 0), or for both to receive one candy
each, (1, 1). This game was designed to examine whether the child would be willing to
beneﬁt another at no cost to themselves. In the envy game, the child chose between an
equal split of candy, (1, 1), or disadvantageous inequality, (1, 2). Since allocating an extra
candy to their partner came at no cost to the child, the envy game aimed to measure participants’ inequity aversion. Finally, in the sharing game, children chose between an equal
split, (1, 1), or a selﬁsh allocation of, (2, 0). The authors found that preferences for equal
splits increased signiﬁcantly with age. While young children 3e4 years of age preferred
selﬁsh allocations, a large fraction of children aged 7e8 years chose the equal split of (1,
1) in each of the three games. These results suggest that rather than being innate, preferences for outcomes consistent with norms such as fairness develop with exposure to culture. In related work, Almås et al. (2010) show that a signiﬁcant development in morality
happens in adolescence, as a response to culture, and Almas et al. (forthcoming) show that
family background is crucial for understanding levels of competitiveness.
Dohmen et al. (2012) jointly elicit preferences of both children and their parents.
Their goal was to examine the extent to which willingness to take risks and trust others
are traits that children inherit from parents, the inﬂuence of positive assortative matching
on this intergenerational transmission and whether the local attitudes in the environment
affects preferences. Children and parent pairs were interviewed at their homes. In order
to maintain control and avoid potential confounds, each child and parent were interviewed separately to ensure that each answers questions individually and independent
of the others. By studying children and their parents in their homes instead of using a
convenient population of undergraduates, the authors were able to gain access to all
members in a family. Results suggest signiﬁcant intergenerational transmission of risk
and trust attitudes, which is strengthened by positive assortative matching between the
parents. The prevailing attitudes in the environment also play a signiﬁcant but independent role in shaping children’s risk and trust preferences.
On the other end of the age spectrum, as life expectancy in the developed world increases, there is greater pressure to push forward the retirement age and for individuals to
keep working later into their years. However, employers are often reluctant to hire older
workers (Bendick et al., 1999) due to the notion that seniors are less productive than their
younger counterparts. While this belief is common (Kovalchick et al., 2005), evidence for
it has been lacking in the economics literature. Using a lab-in-the-ﬁeld design, Charness
and Villeval (2009) aimed to directly compare the preferences and behavior of older

Lab in the Field

individuals such as retirees to those of a younger population. Particularly, whether the two
populations differed in their willingness to cooperate and compete with others.
The ﬁrst set of experiments took place at two large French ﬁrm work sites. To measure
cooperation, juniors (under 30) and seniors (over 50) were invited to participate in a team
production game that was akin to a public goods game typically studied in lab experiments.
In the game, participants were endowed with a private sum that they could choose to
either contribute to the public good (cooperate), where it is multiplied and split evenly
amongst the group, or to keep it. Given the potential of free riding on the contribution
of others, the equilibrium of the game under the assumption of selﬁshness is to keep the
entire endowment while the efﬁcient outcome is for everyone to contribute the maximum
amount. To measure competitiveness, juniors and seniors engaged in a real-effort task
(solving anagrams) and could choose to either be paid at a piece-rate for every anagram
solved or to compete with others in a tournament, where the one who solved the most
anagrams would win a large prize and the others would win a much smaller prize. The
choice of compensation scheme (piece rate versus tournament) served as the measure of
competitiveness. Attitudes towards ﬁnancial risk-taking were also collected.
Charness and Villeval (2009) found that both juniors and seniors responded strongly
to competition and that seniors were more willing to cooperate than juniors. The groups
did not differ in their willingness to engage in ﬁnancial risk taking. Moreover, groups
containing both juniors and seniors were better off than more homogeneous
groups because seniors responded to the presence of juniors by being even more cooperative. The authors replicated these ﬁndings in a traditional lab experiment with a student population and retirees. These ﬁndings suggest that age diversity in the work place
may potentially be beneﬁcial for both employees and employers.
These experiments comparing decision-making in children and adults of different age
groups can teach us about the origin of violations of standard models as well as the development of behavior policy makers may either want to encourage or prevent. By using a
standardized experimental paradigm, the authors were able to maintain tight control over
the study and make direct comparisons between the populations of interest.
More generally, the evidence reviewed here shows that it is important to elicit
behavior and preferences with nonstandard populations that are closer to the theoretically
relevant target population. The method of lab-in-the-ﬁeld is a useful tool to achieve this
aim since it is often difﬁcult or impossible to get these nonstandard populations into the
standard laboratory environments (Table 1).

2. USING LAB-IN-THE FIELD FOR COLLECTING COVARIATES AS
COMPLEMENTS TO RCTs AND FOR TARGETING POLICY
One criticism of randomized control trials (RCTs) is that they are often limited in
discerning the mechanism driving the observed results. Because researchers are often

445

446

Handbook of Field Experiments

Table 1 Theoretically relevant populations
Article
Population and setting

Harbaugh et al. (2001)

Harbaugh et al. (2001)

Alevy et al. (2007)

Dohmen et al. (2012)

Frijters et al. (2015)

Marette et al. (2011)

Grossman and Baldassarri
(2013)

Gilligan et al. (2014)

125 Children in
kindergarten, third
grade, and ﬁfth grade,
and 38 undergraduates
in classrooms
Seven-year and 11-yearold children and
college undergraduates
in classrooms
Market professionals at
the Chicago Board of
Trade and college
students in lab
Familiesdchildren and
their
parentsdinterviewed
at their homes
Chinese migrants
interviewed in hotel
rooms and over the
phone
201 Householdsdwith
women between 25
and 35 years old, with
at least one child under
15, who eat ﬁsh at least
2 a week. Interviews
conducted in home
and preferences elicited
at market
2597 Ugandan farmers in
rural communities

Residents in conﬂictplagued regions

Study

Testing whether endowment effect
changes with age/market
experience.

Testing whether age affects rationality
and consistency of preferences in
line with GARP.
Testing for differences in cascade
behavior and herding between
students and market professionals.
Testing whether willingness to take
risks and trust are inherited from
parents.
Examining selection bias for lab in
ﬁeld studies conducted on
representative population of
migrants versus self-selected
population of migrants.
Welfare effects of regulatory tools
such as labels and/or taxes.

Tested whether group attachment
and relative position in social
networks affects prosocial behavior
towards in-group.
Used incentivized behavioral
activities to measure Nepal
communities’ social capital. Took
advantage of Nepal’s natural
landscape to study communities
which are exposed to uncertainty
of violence.

Lab in the Field

Table 1 Theoretically relevant populationsdcont'd
Article
Population and setting

Spears (2010)

Informal day market
laborers in Rajasthan,
India

Chandrasekhar et al.
(2014)

Villagers in Karnataka,
India

Attanasio et al. (2012)

Residents in Columbia

Binzel and Fehr (2013)

Residents in Cairo, Egypt

Alexander and Christia
(2011)

Students from Mostar,
Bosnia-Herzegovina

Charness and Villeval
(2009)

Juniors (under 30) and
seniors (over 50) at two
large French ﬁrms

Study

Studies whether poverty causes
impulsive behavior through a
“store” game and behavioral test.
Test was designed to mimic
analogous decisions in the real
world.
Studies how real-world social
networks may substitute for formal
contract enforcement by
conducting experiments in villages.
Imitate real-world relation
network as subjects have realworld relationships with each
other. These relationships were
observable from available detailed
social network data for each
household in the village.
Studies how risk-sharing group
formation is affected by preexisting social network and
individual’s risk attitude. Realworld relations were studied as
friendship and kinship already
existed among participants, many
of whom came from the same
community.
Studies how prosocial behavior is
inﬂuenced by people’s social
distance and anonymity by
conducting dictator game in Cairo
communities. Utilizes pre-existing
social relations to mimic real-world
social networks.
Studies the effect of ethnic diversity
on cooperation. Subjects were
drawn from populations that have
historically been in conﬂict (Croats
and Bosnians).
Examine differences in
competitiveness and cooperation
amongst younger and older
individuals.

447

448

Handbook of Field Experiments

limited in the number of treatments they can run due to costs or access to the required
sample size, RCTs frequently cannot identify a particular theoretical model while ruling
out alternative explanations on their own (Viceisza, forthcoming). In this section, we
build the case for using lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology to collect explanatory covariates
that can be used in conjunction with RCTs to inform researchers about the mechanism
leading to the observed behavior. In general, lab-in-the-ﬁeld can be used in two complimentary ways when conducting an RCT. First, lab-in-the-ﬁeld could be used as a
part of the RCT baseline, which allows the researcher to study whether treatment effects
depend on behavior measured in experiments. Second, the researcher can conduct a labin-the-ﬁeld as a part of the outcome of the RCT, studying whether the intervention
affected related behavior, such as overconﬁdence or competitiveness.
Ashraf et al. (2006) ran an RCT exploring the effectiveness of commitment devices
on savings behavior. The authors offered some bank clients in the Philippines commitment savings account with limited access to deposits. The account was designed to be
appealing to clients who are sophisticated about their self-control problems, and in
turn, would like to restrict access to their savings in order to limit impulsive purchases.
Of the 710 clients who were offered this account, 202 (28.4%) opted in. Moreover,
the intervention successfully increased savings: for those clients offered the commitment
savings account, the average savings balances increased by 81% in the following year relative to clients who were in the control group and not offered the account.
While the nonzero take-up rate of the commitment savings device is interesting in its
own right, it is not sufﬁcient evidence for the hypothesis that people chose the account in
order to overcome their self-control problems. In order to provide support for this mechanism, Ashraf et al. (2006) conducted a time discounting experiment before the RCT.
They report that clients who exhibited lower discount rate for future relative to current
trade-offs in the experiment were, consistent with the hypothesis, more likely to choose
the commitment savings account.
Jakiela et al. (2015) sought to examine the causal impact of an education intervention
on cultural values, norms, and social preferences. Although many have claimed that
human capital gains lead to more equitable attitudes and support for democratic
institutions, causal evidence for this relationship was largely absent. A Dutch NGO
ICS Africa introduced a scholarship program to a random sample of sixth grade girls in
Western Kenya. The program led to signiﬁcant improvements in performance on academic tests relative to the control group (Kremer, 2009). Jakiela et al. (2015) ran a
lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiment with girls who were in the treatment group of the Girls
Scholarship Program (GSP) and girls who were in the control group, and hence did
not receive access to the scholarship program. Both groups participate in a modiﬁed
dictator game where the dictator decides how to allocate money between themselves
and another individual. Critical to the design, the sum to be divided was earned by

Lab in the Field

the latter individual through a real effort task, creating an informal “property rights” over
the money.
The authors found that participants in the treatment group exhibited superior academic performance relative to the control group. Moreover, the GSP group allocated
signiﬁcantly more to the other, with a greater shift towards 50-50 splits, than girls
who were not in the program. These results suggest that the randomized education intervention had medium to long-run effects not only on academic performance but on social
preferences and cultural values as well.
In a study on microentrepreneurship, Berge et al. (2015a) examine the effects of business training and business grants on economic outcomes such as business performance,
practice, and investment. The authors collaborated with an established microﬁnance
institution in running the RCT which recruited small scale entrepreneurs in Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania. Participants were randomized to either be enrolled in a business
training course focusing on basic principles such as customer service, pricing, and accounting, or to receive a business grant equivalent to the cost of the training course; performance of both groups were compared to a control. In conjunction with the RCT,
lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiments were run to elicit participants’ risk and competitiveness
preferences, as well as their conﬁdence and willingness to share information.
The authors found that business training had a signiﬁcant and positive effect on outcomes such as sales, proﬁt, and reported happinessdbut only for the male entrepreneurs;
business grants had no signiﬁcant impact for either. Exploring this gender effect further
using collected lab-in-the-ﬁeld measures revealed that female participants were less
willing to share income information with their spouse, suggesting a signiﬁcant levy on
their earnings that may make business expansion less worthwhile. Additionally, they
were less competitive than their male counterparts, which the authors argue is an important factor in the entrepreneurial mind-set.
In order to optimally target policy and RCT interventions towards those who are
most likely to experience positive impact, it is important to understand what traits and
preference measures are associated with economic behavior. Burks et al. (2008) examined
how elicited measures relate to and inﬂuence labor outcomes, speciﬁcally job attachment.
A sample of 1000 trainee truckers at a company operated training facility took part in the
study on how cognitive skills (CS) affect economic preferences and behavior. The authors elicited three measures of CS (IQ, planning ability, quantitative literacy) from
each individual and examined the relationship between CS and standard measures of economic preferences (choice consistency, time and risk preferences). The lab-in-the-ﬁeld
method allowed them to examine how CS relates to actual economic behavior by linking
the elicited measures to human resource records and the relationship between the measures and job attachment. CS was found to have a positive and signiﬁcant correlation with
patience and the willingness to take calculated risks.

449

450

Handbook of Field Experiments

Importantly, higher CS, particularly in the ability to plan, was signiﬁcantly related to
job attachment: participants who displayed better abilities to plan stayed at the job longer,
which was proﬁtable for the company. By using the lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology to link
experimentally elicited measures to real-world behavior, these ﬁndings are able to inform
policy by highlighting a series of traits relevant for labor market outcomes.
Another important use of the lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology is to examine how the
environment and prior experiences of population shape their preferences in order to
improve the targeting of policy measures and RCT interventions. Bchir and Willinger
(2013) exploit natural variation in the potential for lahars (mudﬂows from volcanoes)
in Arequipa, Peru to examine how living with greater ex ante background risk affects
preferences for ﬁnancial risk. The authors utilize a commonly employed method of eliciting risk preferences in the lab, a multiple price list over lotteries (Holt and Laury, 2002;
see Charness et al., 2013 for review), to compare the preferences of individuals living in
high-risk areas to those living with lower levels of background risk. In this method, individuals make a series of decisions between safer lotteries with smaller variances and
riskier lotteries with greater variances; an individual’s risk attitude is measured by the
number of times he or she chooses the safer option. The authors ﬁnd that, contrary to
standard economic intuition, individuals living with greater background were more
risk seeking than those in less exposed areas. However, this difference only held for
low-income participantsdthere was no signiﬁcant relationship between lahar exposure
and risk preferences amongst those with higher incomes.
Eckel et al. (2009) document an analogous relationship between natural hazards and
risk attitudes for individuals who experienced a natural disaster versus those who did not.
Particularly, they elicited risk attitudes from a sample of individuals being evacuated from
the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina and compared their responses to a similar group of
people who did not experience the disaster. Risk preferences were measured using the
Eckel and Grossman (2002) method which offered individuals a choice between six lotteries that differed in their expected return and variance; a given lottery choice could be
used to classify the individual as risk-averse, risk neutral, or risk-seeking. Eckel et al.
(2009) found that those who had experienced Hurricane Katrina were signiﬁcantly
more risk-seeking than the comparison group.
Similarly, Voors et al. (2012) examined how prior exposure to violence on the community level-shaped risk preferences. The authors identiﬁed communities in Burundi
who had been exposed to violent conﬂict and matched them to comparable communities
who were not exposed to the conﬂict. Individuals in both groups were asked to make
choices between safe and risky lotteries in a multiple price list format. They found
that, similar to exposure to natural disasters, exposure to violence also leads individuals
to make riskier choices.
To summarize, collecting covariates using the lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology as part of
an RCT helps in two ways. First, it can help identify the theoretical mechanism driving

Lab in the Field

Table 2 Lab-in-the-ﬁeld as compliment to randomized control trials
Article
Population and setting
Study

Ashraf et al. (2006)

Banking customers in the
Philippines

Berge et al. (2015a)

Microentrepreneurs in
Tanzania

Jakiela et al. (2015)

School-aged Kenyan women

Lahno et al. (2015)

Pairs of individuals in 30
villages in rural Uganda

Voors et al. (2012)

Villagers from Burundi

Signiﬁcant portion of
customers offered
commitment savings vehicle
limiting their access to cash
opted in, especially those
with higher elicited discount
rates.
Evaluated effect of business
training and business grants
on performance. Business
training had signiﬁcant short
and long-term effects for
male entrepreneurs, business
grants did not. Separately
elicited measures suggest null
effect for female
entrepreneurs due to greater
spousal levies and lower
competitiveness.
Sixth-grade girls randomly
assigned to girls scholarship
program (GSP), explored
whether intervention
changed social preferences
and norms. More educated
girls found to be less likely to
appropriate others’ income
and adhere to fair ﬁnancial
allocations.
Studies the external validity of
elicited risk measures in
predicting interpersonal
conﬂict. Finds risk-aversion
per se does not explain level
of conﬂict but rather
differences in risk attitudes
strongly predict interpersonal
conﬂict.
Studies how exposure to
violence affects risk
preferences.
Continued

451

452

Handbook of Field Experiments

Table 2 Lab-in-the-ﬁeld as compliment to randomized control trialsdcont'd
Article
Population and setting
Study

Bchir and Willinger
(2013)

Communities in Arequipa,
Peru

Eckel et al. (2009)

Individuals who were
evacuated after Hurricane
Katrina
1000 Trainee truckers at
company operated trainee
facility.

Burks et al. (2008)

Ward and Singh (2015)

Farmers in rural India

Liu (2013)

Farmers in rural China

Karlan (2005)

Individuals in rural Peru

Studies how differing exposure
to background risk in the
form of mudslides affects risk
preferences.
Studies how exposure to
natural disasters affects risk
attitudes.
Studies effect of cognitive skills
on three tests of preferences,
strategic behavior, and
perseverance in the job.
Examines how elicited risk
preferences, loss, and
ambiguity aversion relate to
the propensity to adopt new
risk-reducing farming
technologies.
Studies how elicited risk
preferences, loss aversion,
and probability weighting
relate to adoption of new
agricultural biotechnology.
Examines how elicited
trustworthiness in a trust
game predicts propensity to
default on microﬁnance
loans.

the success or failure of the program. Second, this data can assist policy makers in targeting
future interventions to participants who are most likely to adopt/beneﬁt from it
(Table 2).

3. COMPARING BETWEEN CONTEXTS AND CULTURES
Another beneﬁt of the lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology relative to other methods is the
ability to make direct comparisons between different populations and contexts. This
advantage is exempliﬁed in studies examining the role of culture on decision-making.
Henrich et al. (2006) study whether willingness to engage in costly punishment is universal amongst cultures, arguing that a possible mechanism for such cooperation could
be the use of costly punishment of defectors. To test this conjecture, they compare

Lab in the Field

the use of costly punishment between industrialized (using a standard student population)
and nonindustrialized populations.
A total of 1762 adults in 15 different societies participated in the experiment. Populations ranged from Western educated students at Emory University to nomadic adults in
the Amazon. Each individual participated in three games aimed to capture willingness to
engage in costly punishment and altruism. In the Ultimatum Game, one participant was
endowed with a day’s wage and chose how to split it with his or her partner. The partner
could engage in costly punishment by rejecting allocations deemed too lowdthis would
result in both players getting nothing. In the Third-Party Punishment game, participants
observed the dictator game allocation decisions of another pair and could sacriﬁce part of
his or her endowment to punish a greedy Dictator. Last, all participants played the
dictator game where they decided how to split a sum of money between themselves
and another participant (who did not have a choice).
Henrich et al. (2006) found substantial costly punishment in every culture. In the Ultimatum game, willingness to reject an offer decreased as the size of the offer increased
from 0% to 50% of the endowed cash. Rejection rates differed substantially by population: in some societies only 15% were willing to reject a low offer while in others 60%
were willing to reject. A similar pattern was found in the Third-Party Punishment game:
all societies were willing to punish low offers to some extent, but this punishment rate
ranged from 28% in Tsimane to 90% in Gusii. In each society, punishment rates in
both games were highly correlated with each other as well as the measure of altruism
in the dictator game.
Examining the data set of Herrmann et al. (2008) which used the standardized protocol of a public goods game across 16 subject pools and six distinct cultures, Gachter
et al. (2010) analyze rates of contribution and cooperation between cultures in a public
goods game with and without punishment. They ﬁnd little variation in behavior amongst
the subject pools within a culture. Consistent with prior ﬁndings (e.g., Gachter and Fehr,
2000), contributions were positive and dropped signiﬁcantly at the end of the game.
However, contribution rates as well as responses to the ability to punish differed significantly between cultures. Contributions in English-speaking cultures and Protestant
Europe were higher than in Southern Europe and the Arab-speaking cultures. Additionally, English-speaking, Protestant Europe, and Confucian cultures contributed signiﬁcantly more when players had the ability to punish free riders while those in Southern
Europe, Arab-speaking, and ex-communist cultures did not respond to the potential
to punish others.
By using the same experimental methodology across a variety of cultures, researchers
were able to make direct comparisons between how social preferences developed in each
of the societies studied. Despite similar social standing within their respective societies,
individuals made vastly different choices in their willingness to cooperate with others,
share resources, and punish defectors. This suggests that environmental factors and the

453

454

Handbook of Field Experiments

culture in which individuals develop have a critical inﬂuence on how they interact with
others. Particularly, the presence of stable institutions and effective means of sanctioning
violators of social norms appear to play a key role in people’s willingness to engage in
costly behavior that is beneﬁcial for others. These ﬁndings have signiﬁcant implications
for the development of policy and interventions aimed at fostering such behavior.
In some cases, lab-in-the-ﬁeld is useful to test a hypothesis regarding parameters that
cannot be randomized in the lab. For example, Gneezy et al. (2009) examined whether
culture inﬂuences the gender gap in willingness to compete or if the gap was due to
innate differences in preferences. Gneezy et al. (2003) and Niederle and Vesterlund
(2007) showed that women react less to competitive incentives and are signiﬁcantly
less likely to enter competitions than men even when their ability and performance
would have allowed them to win.
This gender difference in preference with respect to competitiveness has been replicated many times in laboratory experiments (see Croson and Gneezy, 2009 for review).
However, it is impossible to know from these experiments if the difference in preferences
originated from innate biological differences between men and women (“nature”) or due
to the culture men and women are raised at (“nurture”). In order to disentangle the two
explanations, Gneezy et al. (2009) examined gender differences in competitive preferences between a patriarchal society in Tanzania (the Maasai) and a matrilineal society
in India (the Khasi). The Khasi tribe is special because it is organized around the women
who own the property and make many of the substantive decisions. Participants in the
experiment were asked to choose between a piece rate per success (landing a tennis
ball in a basket 3 meters away) or compete with others on the number of successful tosses
such that the winner would get three times more per success than in the piece rate payment and the losers would get nothing (in case of a tie both participants were paid the
same as in the piece rate).
Results revealed that similar to gender differences in the west, Maasai men were
signiﬁcantly more likely to choose competition over piece rate than the women. However, this gap disappeared for the Khasidwomen were just as likely to compete as men.
The results were robust to a variety of controls including separately elicited risk attitudes.
These ﬁndings suggest that culture could affect gender differences in preferences up to a
point of eliminating them.
Hoffman et al. (2011) similarly examine the effect of culture on the gender gap in
spacial ability. Voyer et al. (1995) demonstrate that women perform signiﬁcantly worse
than men on tasks requiring spacial reasoning. Spacial ability is related to performance on
engineering and problem-solving tasks (Poole and Stanley, 1972), and the gender gap in
these abilities has been used to explain the relative dearth of women in science jobs
(Spelke and Pinker, 2005). Hoffman et al. (2011) tested whether the gender gap was

Lab in the Field

Table 3 Comparing between contexts
Article
Population and setting

Henrich et al. (2006)
Gachter et al. (2010)

Random sample across 15 diverse
populations around the world
120 Participants across 6 different
cultures

Herrman et al. (2008)

120 Participants across 6 different
cultures

Gneezy et al. (2009)

Members of the patrilineal Maasai
tribe and the matrilineal Khasi
tribe
Members of the patrilineal Karbi
tribe and the matrilineal Khasi
tribe
33 Nations for study 1, Canada
and People’s Republic of
China for studies 2 and 3

Hoffman et al. (2011)

Hui et al. (2004)

Jakiela et al. (2015)

Residents of rural villages in
western Kenya

Study

Willingness to engage in costly
punishment
Willingness to contribute and
cooperate in public goods
games with and without
punishment
Willingness to engage in
antisocial punishment in public
goods games
Whether gender gap in
competitive preferences is due
to nature versus nurture
Whether gender gap in spacial
ability is due to nature versus
nurture
How cultural perceptions of
power moderates the effect of
empowerment on job
satisfaction
Social preferences governing
distribution of earned versus
unearned income, ﬁnds unlike
with western student samples,
village populations do not
distinguish between earned
and unearned income

due to nature versus nurture by having two genetically similar participant pools (the Khasi
and the Karbi) complete a puzzle task involving special abilities. Importantly, as described
above, the Khasi are a matrilineal tribe while the Karbi are patriarchal. The authors found
a strong and signiﬁcant gender gap amongst the Karbi where men were more successful
in solving the puzzle than women. However, there was no signiﬁcant gender gap in the
Khasi. The results were robust to a variety of controls such as education and income.
By comparing performance on the same task across different cultures, these ﬁndings
suggest that like the gender gap in competitiveness, the gap in spacial reasoning is largely
inﬂuenced by nurture rather than nature. If the gap in performance and preference is due
to cultural and environmental factors rather than innate differences between genders, this
leaves room for policy and external interventions aimed at closing that gap (Table 3).

455

456

Handbook of Field Experiments

4. EXTERNAL VALIDITY
A common concern with traditional lab experiments is whether ﬁndings would generalize to the relevant environments and contexts. Take, for example, the gift exchange
model of labor contracts ﬁrst proposed by Akerlof (1982). In the model, ﬁrms pay wages
above the market-clearing rate in expectation that workers will reciprocate the higher
wages by putting in greater effort. Fehr et al. (1993) provided an early test of the model
by randomizing participants into the role of employer and employee in the lab. The
employer’s earnings were based on an exogenously assigned proﬁt function of the employee’s chosen level of effort minus the wage paid to them. The employee’s earnings
were calculated as the wage offered by the employer minus the effort cost, which was
also determined by an exogenous function. The task proceeded with the employer
choosing a number corresponding to the wage and the employee responding by either
accepting the wage and choosing a number corresponding to effort or rejecting the
wage contract. The authors found that higher wage offers were reciprocated with higher
choices of effortdsuggesting evidence for gift exchange. A very large literature
based on lab experiments replicated and extended these early ﬁndings (Charness and
Kuhn, 2011)
Gneezy and List (2006) studied gift exchange by examining whether employees
reciprocated higher-wage offers by putting in greater effort. However, unlike Fehr
et al. (1993), the authors used a lab-in-the-ﬁeld setting where employees were recruited
to complete an assignment and chose how much real effort to exert for a certain wage.
Employees were recruited to perform actual work on a task for a speciﬁed amount of
time at a wage of $12 an hour. When the employees arrived to complete the task,
one group was told that instead of being paid $12 an hour, they would instead be paid
$20. A second group worked for the expected wage. The authors found that although
employees in the ﬁrst group started out working harder than the second, the effort of
the two groups quickly converged. The employers in the experiment would have
been better off paying the market-clearing wage rather than attempting to encourage
reciprocity by offering a higher wage.
In order to explore the external validity of experimentally elicited risk attitudes,
Hanoch et al. (2006) studied the domain speciﬁcity of willingness to take risk or how
people’s perception and chosen course of action in dealing with risk vary depending
on the domain: a person may appear risk seeking in one domain (ﬁnance) but risk averse
in another (sports). The type of risk spans across different domainsddivers and bungee
jumpers in the recreational domain, gym members from the health-conscious domain,
smokers from health-risk domain, casino visitors from the gambling domain, and stock
traders from investment domain.

Lab in the Field

Hanoch et al. (2006) elicited risk perception and likelihood of engaging in risky activity across these domains. The results suggest that the domain-speciﬁc elicitation
method is externally valid since it correlates with actual risk-taking in that domain by
the target population. Moreover, risk attitudes themselves appear domain speciﬁc: risk
taking in one domain does not appear to be correlated with risk taking in another.
For example, gamblers who are risk seeking in casinos are not necessarily risk seeking
in the health and recreation domains. The authors conclude that a general measure of
risk fails to capture people’s behavior across domains, and as such both theory and experiments should utilize more domain-speciﬁc measures.
Dohmen et al. (2012) explore a similar question of what measure of risk is optimal for
predicting and describing behavior. They study how risk-taking propensity is affected
by various biological and socioeconomic factors such as gender, age, height, and family
background, and examine the stability of elicited risk attitudes across domains of real-life
behavior.
The data used was from a national survey, the German Socio-Economic Panel
(SOEP), which collects data from a large, representative sample. The survey asked
general risk questions about people’s willingness to take risk and recorded information
on savings, investment behavior, health expenditures, etc. Responses were not incentivized. The authors conducted a complementary experiment where participants’ answers on the SOEP survey could be compared with choices on standardized
experimental paradigms used in the literature to elicit preferences in an incentive
compatible manner.
The results suggest that incentivized lottery experiments typically used to elicit risk
attitudes lack predictive power over the unincentivized general survey questions in
predicting relevant real-world behavior such as investment choices. Similar to Hanoch
et al. (2006), Dohmen et al. (2012) ﬁnd that domain-speciﬁc questions are best
at predicting risky behavior in the respective domain. Additionally, the general risk
question that consists of a scale representing how willing participants are to take on
risk in general explains a substantial amount of variance across domains of risky
behavior, outperforming the incentivized lottery task. By using the lab-in-the-ﬁeld
methodology, the authors were able to directly test the external validity of commonly
used measures of risk preference, ﬁnding that the general and domain speciﬁc questions
to be more representative of individuals’ willingness to take risk in theoretically relevant
contexts.
In a similar vein, Barr and Zeitlin (2010) investigate how well measures of social preferences elicited using the dictator game reﬂect actual prosocial behavior in real-life “speciﬁc, naturally occurring, policy-relevant decision-making.” Participants were primary
school teachers in Uganda who took part in dictator game with their students’ parents
serving as recipients. The chosen allocation game was compared to teachers’ allocation
of time to teaching, which served as a real-life proxy for prosocial behavior. The results

457

458

Handbook of Field Experiments

Table 4 External validity
Article

Population and setting

Study

Insurance versus savings
for the poor: why one
should offer either
both or none

Rural villagers in the
Philippines

Galizzi and Martinez
(2015)

University students and
alumni (London School of
Economics and Political
Science)

Ligon and Schechter
(2012)

Villagers in Paraguay

Benz and Meier (2008)

Students at the University of
Zurich

Hanoch et al. (2006)

Decision-makers who are
regularly subjected to risks

Study residents in developing
countries’ decisions regarding
insurance, saving and risksharing. Sample is more
compatible with the idea of
risk sharing at the village level
and strengthens external
validity of results.
Compare results from lab
experiments, ﬁeld
experiments and self-reports
of the past behavior to assess
the external validity of social
preference games.
Studies the motive for sharing in
rural villages. Participants from
rural Paraguay communities so
that their sharing decisions are
closer to real-world results.
Examined money transfer data
from both the experiment and
real-world record to examine
external validity of
experiment.
Conducted donation
experiments in order to
compare students’ behavior in
games with their behavior in
an unconnected decision
situation about donating to
social funds. Studies the
relationship between
participants’ behavior in
experiment and decisions
outside the laboratory.
Studies the domain speciﬁcity of
risk-taking behavior. Subjects
drawn from different real-life
risk-taking domains for
external validity.

Lab in the Field

Table 4 External validitydcont'd
Article
Population and setting

Dohmen et al. (2012)

Representative sample of
German population

Barr and Zeitlin (2010)

Primary school teachers in
Uganda

Berge et al. (2015b)

Small-scale entrepreneurs in
Salaam, Tanzania

Study

Compared results from national
survey and lab-in-the-ﬁeld
experiment to examine how
well people’s responses to
general risk questions (and
therefore their risk attitudes)
reﬂect people’s actual decision
when facing real risks in life.
Studies the external validity of
dictator game by comparing
school teachers’ responses in
the games with their actual
prosocial behavior in real life
(extra time allocated to
teaching).
Studies the external validity of
competitiveness measures by
comparing entrepreneurs’
competitive choices in lab-inthe-ﬁeld measures to their
employment choices in the
ﬁeld, ﬁnding a signiﬁcant
correlation.

showed a weak correlation between the two measures, suggesting that behavior in the
dictator game may be capturing a preference orthogonal to decisions involving allocations of time to teaching (Table 4).

5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we consider an important element in the toolbox of researchers who are
interested in behavior in the “real world”dlab-in-the-ﬁeld. Such experiments can be
used to inform researchers and policy makers about individual preferences, mechanism
design, and best practices. Good studies take into account that, as argued by Harrison
et al. (2015), “Any data generated by an experiment needs to be interpreted jointly
with considerations from theory, common sense, complementary data, econometric
methods and expected applications.”
Using carefully designed lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiments can increase our understanding
of the mechanisms behind behavior, inform the design of ﬁeld experiments and increase
the effectiveness of policies at a relatively low cost to the researcher. This method can

459

460

Handbook of Field Experiments

bridge the gap between traditional lab experiments and ﬁeld experiments, as well as take
the powerful tool of lab experiments to new, theoretically relevant subject pools and
environments.
Running lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiments brings with it new challenges not present in
traditional laboratory environments. In this section, we outline several lessons that we
have learned from conducting lab-in-the-ﬁeld studies.
1. Simpler is better
Nonstandard populations, especially in developing countries, can exhibit large
variation in their level of literacy and mathematical ability. With that in mind, it is
important to develop methodology that is easy for participants to understand and mirrors real-world decision making. As an example, consider the elicitation of risk
preferences from a population in rural Senegal using a series of validated methods,
with some more complex than the others. Charness and Villeval (2009) found that
presenting participants with a complicated list of choices between lotteries yielded
inconsistent, noisy data more than 50% of the time; in contrast, a simpler measure
analogous to a choice of how much resources one is willing to expose to risk yielded
more precise estimates that correlated with real-world behavior.
2. Use standardized, validated methods
When designing a study to take to the ﬁeld, it is important to use standardized,
validated methods to ensure that results are comparable and replicable across contexts.
As outlined in Section 3, one of the main advantages of the lab-in-the-ﬁeld methodology is the ability to compare results across contexts and cultures. Using new
methods to elicit preferences in a standard student population is less of a concern
because one can readily have access to a similar context and population again in order
to validate the novel methodology and compare it to prior work either directly in the
same experiment or across studies. In the ﬁeld, however, using novel methods that
have not been validated may handicap the researcher in arguing that the elicited measure corresponds to the construct of interest.
3. Be aware of cultural factors when developing methodology
It is critical to be aware of cultural differences when developing the methodology for
a study. A design that can be carried out easily in one context, e.g., the United States, may
be impossible to implement in another, e.g., Tanzania. In turn, it may be useful to
include an individual deeply familiar with the culture and environment for a given study
as a part of the research process. For example, the four countries experiment of Roth
et al. (1991) compared the market and bargaining behavior amongst participants in
the United States, Yugoslavia, Israel, and Japan. The authors found that while market
behavior was consistent between countries, bargaining behavior diverged. The research
team came up with a number of design modiﬁcations in order to be able to argue that
culture rather than ﬂaws in the experimental design drove the results. For example, in
order to ensure that language in the instructions was consistent between countries, the

Lab in the Field

English instructions were ﬁrst translated to the respective language, e.g., Hebrew. The
Hebrew instructions were then translated back to English to ensure that meaning was
not lost in the translation.
For a lab-in-the-ﬁeld study, one of us (Gneezy) wanted to draw blood from villagers near Shillong in India, in order to correlate biological markers with measures of
competitiveness. When arriving to the research site, it turns out that the participants
refused to have their blood drawn because of a belief that “people from the mountains
will come over, take their blood, and feed it to snakes.”
Religious factors can play a role as well. For example, for a study in Bosnia on the
effects of post-war partitioning on investment behavior, Imas et al. planned to use a
validated risk measure to proxy for individuals’ willingness to invest that involved a
ﬁnancial gamble. However, ﬁnancial gambling was against custom in the predominantly Muslim population so another method needed to be devised. At the end,
the authors settled on a hypothetical scenario involving willingness to invest in either
a risky business venture with both a high upside and downside or a safer venture
involving less variance.
4. Plan out logistics ahead of time
When going into the ﬁeld, it is vital to plan out the logistics well ahead of time and
factor delays into your timeline. Obtaining the right permissions and getting the relevant people on board early is critical for successfully running a lab-in-the-ﬁeld
experiment.
For example, in many contexts, it will be difﬁcult to follow-up with a population
if your study involves a delayed payment. In such situations, it may be more effective
to design a study where a random subset of the subjects is selected to be paid rather
than taking on the impossible task of tracking everyone down. Similarly, busy people
such as ﬁnancial professionals may not care about the low stakes involved in typical
incentivized lab experiments. Since incentivizing an experiment for the very rich
would make the stakes consequential is outside the budget of most experimentalists,
it may be more effective to run a hypothetical study with large stakes.

REFERENCES
Akerlof, 1982. Labor contracts as partial gift exchange. Q. J. Econ. 97 (4), 543e569.
Alevy, Haigh, List, 2007. Information cascades: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment with ﬁnancial market
professionals. J. Finance 62 (1), 151e180.
Alexander, Christia, 2011. Context modularity of human altruism. Science 334 (6061), 1392e1395.
Almås, I., Cappelen, A.W., Salvanes, K.G., Sørensen, E.Ø., Tungodden, B., 2010. Fairness and the development of inequality acceptance. Science 328, 1176e1178. Management Science.
Almås, I., Cappelen, A.W., Salvanes, K.G., Sørensen, E.Ø., Tungodden, B., 2016. Willingness to compete:
family matters. Manag. Sci. (forthcoming).
Anderson, Holt, 1997. Information cascades in the laboratory. Am. Econ. Rev. 87 (5), 847e862.
Andreoni, 1989. Giving with impure altruism: applications to charity and Ricardian equivalence. J. Polit.
Econ. 97 (6), 1447e1458.

461

462

Handbook of Field Experiments

Andreoni, Miller, March, 2002. Giving according to GARP: an experimental test of the consistency of preferences for altruism. Econometrica 70 (2), 737e753.
Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., Yin, W., May 2006. Tying Odysseus to the Mast: evidence from a commitment savings product in the Philippines. Q. J. Econ. 121 (2), 635e672.
Attanasio, Barr, Cardenas, Genicot, Meghir, 2012. Risk pooling, risk preferences, and social networks. Am.
Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 4 (2), 134e167.
Barr, Zeitlin, 2010. Dictator Games in the Lab and in Nature: External Validity Tested and Investigated in
Ugandan Primary Schools. Mimeo.
Bchir, Willinger, 2013. Does the Exposure to Natural Hazards Affect Risk and Time Preferences? Some Insights From a Field Experiment in Peru. Mimeo.
Benartzi, Thaler, 1995. Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle. J. Econ. 110 (1), 73e92.
Bendick, Brown, Wall, 1999. No foot in the door: an experimental study of employment discrimination
against older workers. J. Aging Soc. Policy 10 (4), 5e23.
Benz, Meier, 2008. Do people behave in experiments as in the Field? e Evidence from donations. Exp.
Econ. 11 (3), 268e281.
Berge, L.I.O., Pires, A., Bjorvatn, K., Tungodden, B., 2015a. Competitiveness in the lab, successful in the
ﬁeld. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 118, 303e317.
Berge, L.I.O., Bjorvatn, K., Tungodden, B., 2015b. The role of human and ﬁnancial capital in microenterprise development: experimental evidence from Tanzania. Manag. Sci. 61 (4), 707e722.
Bikhchandani, Sharma, 2000. Herd behavior in ﬁnancial markets. IMF Staff Pap. 47 (3), 279e310.
Binzel, Fehr, 2013. Giving and sorting among friends: evidence from a lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiment. Econ.
Lett. 121 (2), 214e217.
Burks, Carpenter, Gotte, Rustichini, 2008. Cognitive skills explain economic preferences, strategic behavior,
and job attachment. PNAS 106 (19), 7745e7750.
Cappelen, A.W., Nygaard, K., Sørensen, E.Ø., Tungodden, B., 2015. Social preferences in the lab: a comparison of students and a representative population. Scand. J. Econ. 117 (4), 1306e1326.
Chandrasekhar, Kinnan, Larreguy, 2014. Social Networks as Contract Enforcement: Evidence From a Lab
Experiment in the Field. NBER Working Papers, 20259.
Charness, G., Kuhn, P., February, 2011. Lab labor: what can labor economists learn in the lab? Handb. Labor
Econ. 4a, 229e330.
Charness, Villeval, 2009. Cooperation and competition in intergenerational experiments in the ﬁeld and
laboratory. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (3), 956e978.
Charness, Gneezy, Imas, 2013. Experimental methods: eliciting risk preferences. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 87,
43e51.
Croson, Gneezy, 2009. Gender differences in preferences. J. Econ. Lit. 47 (2), 448e474.
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, U., 2012. The intergenerational transmission of risk and trust attitudes.
Rev. Econ. Stud. 79 (2), 645e677.
Eckel, Grossman, 2002. Sex differences and statistical stereotyping in attitudes toward ﬁnancial risk. Evol.
Hum. Behav. 23 (4), 281e295.
Eckel, El-Gamal, Wilson, 2009. Risk loving after the storm: a Bayesian-Network study of Hurricane Katrina
evacuees. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 69 (2), 110e124.
Fehr, Bernhard, Rockenbach, 2008. Egalitarianism in young children. Nature 454, 1079e1083.
Fehr, Kirchsteiger, Riedl, 1993. Does fairness prevent market clearing? An experimental investigation. Q. J.
Econ. 108 (2), 437e459.
Fehr, Kirchler, Weichbold, Gachter, 1998. When social norms overpower competition: gift exchange in
experimental labor markets. J. Labor Econ. 16 (2), 324e351.
Frijters, Kong, Liu, 2015. Who Is Coming to the Artefactual Field Experiment? Participation Bias Among
Chinese Rural Migrants. NBER Working Papers, 20953.
Forsythe, Horowitz, Savin, Sefton, 1994. Fairness in simple bargaining experiments. Games Econ. Behav. 6
(3), 347e369.
Gachter, Fehr, 2000. Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments. Am. Econ. Rev. 90 (4),
980e994.

Lab in the Field

Gachter, Herrmann, Thoni, 2010. Culture and cooperation. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 365 (1553),
2651e2661.
Galizzi, Martinez, 2015. On the External Validity of Social-Preference Games: A Systematic Lab-Field
Study. Working Papers 802. Barcelona Graduate School of Economics.
Gilligan, Pasquali, Samii, 2014. Civil war and social cohesion: lab-in-the-ﬁeld evidence from Nepal. Am. J.
Polit. Sci. 58 (3), 604e619.
Gneezy, List, 2006. Putting behavioral economics to work: testing for gift exchange in labor markets using
ﬁeld experiments. Econometrica 74 (5), 1365e1384.
Gneezy, Potters, 1997. An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods. Q. J. Econ. 112 (2), 631e645.
Gneezy, Leonard, List, 2009. Gender differences in competition: evidence from a matrilineal and a patriarchal society. Econometrica 77 (5), 1637e1664.
Gneezy, Niederle, Rustichini, 2003. Performance in competiitive environments: gender differences. Q. J.
Econ. 118 (3), 1049e1074.
Grossman, Baldassarri, 2013. The effect of group attachment and social position on prosocial behavior e evidence from lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiments. PLoS One 8 (3), e58750.
Guth, Schmittberger, Schwarze, 1982. An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. J. Econ. Behav.
Organ. 3 (4), 367e388.
Henrich, Heine, Norenzayan, 2010. The weirdest people in the world? Behav. Brain Sci. 33, 61e135.
Hui, Au, Fock, 2004. Empowerment effects across cultures. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 35 (46e60), 46e60.
Haigh, List, 2005. Do professional traders exhibit myopic loss aversion? An experimental analysis. J. Finance
60 (1), 523e534.
Hanoch, Johnson, Wilke, 2006. Domain speciﬁcity in experimental measures and participant recruitment.
Psychol. Sci. 17 (4), 300e304.
Harbaugh, Krause, Berry, 2001a. GARP for kids: on the development of rational choice behavior. Am.
Econ. Rev. 91 (5), 1539e1545.
Harbaugh, Krause, Vesterlund, 2001b. Are adults better behaved than children? Age, experience, and the
endowment effect. Econ. Lett. 70 (2), 175e181.
Harrison, G., Lau, M., Williams, 2002. Estimating individual discount rates for Denmark: a ﬁeld experiment.
Am. Econ. Rev. 925, 1606e1617.
Henrich, et al., 2006. Costly punishment across human societies. Science 312 (5781), 1767e1770.
Harrison, G.W., List, J.A., 2004. Field experiments. J. Econ. Lit. 42 (4), 1009e1055.
Harrison, G.W., Lau, M.I., Rutstr€
om, E.E., 2015. Theory, experimental design and econometrics are
complementary. In: Frechette, G., Schotter, A. (Eds.), Methods of Modern Experimental Economics.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Herrmann, Thoni, Gachter, 2008. Antisocial punishment across societies. Science 319 (5868), 1362e1367.
Hoffman, Gneezy, List, 2011. Nurture affects gender differences in spatial abilities. PNAS 108 (306),
14786e14788.
Holt, Laury, 2002. Risk aversion and incentive effects. Am. Econ. Rev. 92 (5), 1644e1655.
Jakiela, P., Miguel, E., te Velde, V.L., 2015. Youve earned it: estimating the impact of human capital on
social preferences. Exp. Econ. 18 (3), 385e407.
Karlan, December 2005. Using experimental economics to measure social capital and predict real ﬁnancial
decisions. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (5), 1688e1699.
Karlan, List, 2007. Does price matter in charitable giving? Evidence from a large-scale natural ﬁeld
experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (5), 1774e1793.
Knetsch, 1989. The endowment effect and evidence of nonreversible indifference curves. Am. Econ. Rev.
79, 1277e1284.
Kovalchick, et al., 2005. Aging and decision-making: a comparison between neurologically healthy elderly
and young individuals. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 58 (1), 79e94.
Kremer, M., Miguel, E., Thornton, R., 2009. Incentives to learn. Rev. Econ. Stat. 91 (3), 437e456.
Lahno, A., Serra-Garcia, M., D’Exelle, B., Verschoor, A., 2015. Conﬂicting risk attitudes. J. Econ. Behav.
Organ. 118, 136e149.
Ligon, Schechter, 2012. Motives for sharing in social networks. J. Dev. Econ. 99 (1), 13e26.

463

464

Handbook of Field Experiments

Liu, 2013. Time to change what to sow: risk preferences and technology adoption decisions of cotton farmers
in China. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95 (4), 1386e1403.
Locke, Mann, 2005. Professional trader discipline and trade disposition. J. Financ. Econ. 76 (2), 401e444.
Marette, Roosen, Blanchemanche, 2011. The combination of lab and ﬁeld experiments for beneﬁt-cost
analysis. J. Beneﬁt-Cost Anal. 2 (3), 1e34.
Niederle, Vesterlund, 2007. Do women stay away from competition? Do men compete too much? Q. J.
Econ. 122 (3), 1067e1101.
Poole, Stanley, 1972. A factorial and predictive study of spatial abilities. Aust. J. Psychol. 24 (3), 317e320.
Roth, A.E., Prasnikar, V., Okuno-Fujiwara, M., Zamir, S., December 1991. Bargaining and market
behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and Tokyo: an experimental study. Am. Econ. Rev. 81,
1068e1095.
Spears, 2010. Economic Decision-Making in Poverty Depletes Behavioral Control. CEPS Working Paper,
213.
Spelke, Pinker, 2005. The Science of Gender in Science: A Debate. Edge Foundation.
Viceisza, A., 2016. Creating a lab in the ﬁeld: economics experiments for policymaking. J. Econ. Surv.
(forthcoming).
Voors, Nillesen, Verwimp, Bulte, Lensink, van Soest, 2012. Violent conﬂict and behavior: a ﬁeld experiment
in Burundi. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (2), 941e964.
Voyer, Voyer, Bryden, 1995. Magnitude of sex differences in spatial abilities: a meta-analysis and consideration of critical variables. Psychol. Bull. 117, 250e270.
Ward, P.S., Singh, V., 2015. Using ﬁeld experiments to elicit risk and ambiguity preferences: behavioural
factors and the adoption of new agricultural technologies in rural India. J. Dev. Stud. 51 (6), 707e724.

