Statistical Science
2007, Vol. 22, No. 4, 637–650
DOI: 10.1214/07-STS245
In the Public Domain

A Conversation with Monroe Sirken
Barry I. Graubard, Paul S. Levy and Gordon B. Willis

Abstract. Born January 11, 1921 in New York City, Monroe Sirken grew
up in a suburb of Pasadena, California. He earned B.A. and M.A. degrees in
sociology at UCLA in 1946 and 1947, and a Ph.D. in 1950 in sociology with
a minor in mathematics at the University of Washington in 1950 where Professor Z. W. Birnbaum was his mentor and thesis advisor. As a Post-Doctoral
Fellow of the Social Science Research Council, Monroe spent 1950–1951 at
the Statistics Laboratory, University of California at Berkeley and the Office
of the Assistant Director for Research, U.S. Bureau of the Census in Suitland,
Maryland.
Monroe visited the Census Bureau at a time of great change in the use of
sampling and survey methods, and decided to remain. He began his government career there in 1951 as a mathematical statistician, and moved to the
National Office of Vital Statistics (NOVS) in 1953 where he was an actuarial mathematician and a mathematical statistician. He has held a variety of
research and administrative positions at the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) and he was the Associate Director, Research and Methodology
and the Director, Office of Research and Methodology until 1996 when he
became a senior research scientist, the title he currently holds.
Aside from administrative responsibilities, Monroe’s major professional
interests have been conducting and fostering survey and statistical research
responsive to the needs of federal statistics. His interest in the design of rare
and sensitive population surveys led to the development of network sampling
which improves precision by linking multiple selection units to the same observation units. His interest in fostering research on the cognitive aspects of
survey methods led to the establishment of permanent questionnaire design
research laboratories, first at NCHS and later at other federal statistical agencies here and abroad.

Barry I. Graubard is Senior Investigator, Biostatistics
Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, 6120 Executive Blvd, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA (e-mail: graubarb@mail.nih.gov).
Paul S. Levy is RTI Senior Fellow, Statistical Methods in
Health Sciences, and Senior Research Statistician, RTI
International, 3040 Cornwallis Rd. PO Box 12194,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709-2194, USA
(e-mail: levy@rti.org). Gordon B. Willis is Cognitive
Psychologist, Applied Research Program, Division of
Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer
Institute, 6130 Executive Blvd, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA (e-mail: willisg@mail.nih.gov).
637

638

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

Monroe has been active in serving the statistical community. He has served
on many committees of the American Statistical Association (ASA) and the
Washington Statistical Society (WSS). He is a charter member of the Federal
Committee on Statistical Methodology (FCSM) and chairs its research subcommittee that oversees a grants program in statistical and survey research
that is funded by a consortium of federal statistical agencies, and administered by the National Science Foundation. He is a Fellow of the American
Statistical Association and the American Association for the Advancement
of Science, and is an elected member of the International Statistical Institute.
He is the recipient of the Public Health Service Superior Service Award, and
the ASA WSS Roger Herriot Award for Innovation in Government Statistics.
This conversation ranges over Monroe’s education
and research agendas during a 55-year career as a government statistician. The conversation took place at
the National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville,
Maryland, in three sessions during the spring of 2006.
EARLY LIFE

Graubard: Could we begin by talking about your
early life?
Sirken: My mother was born in Scranton, Pennsylvania and married my father in 1919. My father was
born in Poland and his family migrated to the United
States about 1910 when he was about 12 years old. He
was a disabled World War I veteran and died when I
was about 14 years old. I was born in New York City,
moved to upstate New York when I was about two, and
ten years later moved to California. My mother, sister and I lived in Sierra Madre, a suburb of Pasadena,
where I attended school before moving to Los Angeles
and graduating from Fairfax High School in June 1938.
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT LOS ANGELES

Graubard: Then you went to the University of California, Los Angeles. Why that school?
Sirken: Well, I never considered going elsewhere.
UCLA was virtually free for California high school
graduates with good grades. As I recall, UCLA tuition
my first semester in September 1938 was $29 plus $4
for a student membership card that entitled me to admission for all UCLA sports events. Another financially related reason is, like most students attending
UCLA at that time, I couldn’t afford to live on campus, and UCLA was close enough to where we lived
that I could commute. Foremost, I thought UCLA was
a great university.
Graubard: I believe that your B.A. and M.A. were
in the social sciences, and I wonder how you became
interested in statistics and mathematics?

F IG . 1.

Monroe’s UCLA Student Membership Card, 1938.

Sirken: I got a B.A. in sociology in 1946 and the
following year an M.A. in anthropology and sociology. How I became interested in statistics is a longer
story. I began UCLA as a pre-med major with intentions of going to medical school but during my sophomore year, I contracted tuberculosis. After recovering
my health, about three years later, I returned to UCLA
in 1943. In my financial situation, it was unrealistic to
think of medical school. So I changed my major to sociology thinking that I might become a social worker.
However, some faculty in the sociology department encouraged me to think about becoming a sociologist and
advised me to take as much mathematics as possible.
So I did, without really appreciating how math would
help me as a sociologist or anything else. About 1945,
I took my first course in mathematical statistics from
Dr. Paul Hoel.
Graubard: Why didn’t you stay at UCLA for your
Ph.D.?
Sirken: Well, for one thing, students were not encouraged to get the Ph.D. at the same universities at
which they were undergraduates. However, the more
important reason is that I had become quite interested
in quantitative sociology, and UCLA did not offer that

A CONVERSATION WITH MONROE SIRKEN

kind of graduate program at the time. I was awarded a
fellowship in the sociology department at the University of Washington, which my UCLA advisors said was
strongly quantitatively oriented.
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON

Graubard: So what department did you actually end
up in at the University of Washington?
Sirken: I started out as a teaching assistant in the
sociology department. But one of the greatest strokes
of good fortune in my professional life occurred soon
after I arrived in Seattle though I didn’t realize it at the
time. And that good fortune was ultimately responsible
for me ending up straddling two departments.
In 1947, the math department at the University of
Washington began to offer a two-year sequence of
graduate courses in statistics and the person in charge
of the program was Professor Z. W. Birnbaum. I was
unsure that I qualified so I went over to Dr. (Bill) Birnbaum and described my background in math and statistics and my interests in quantitative sociology. To
make a long story short he accepted me, and I took
the courses he offered in 1947–1948 and did very well.
He was an excellent instructor, took an interest in his
students and they very much appreciated him. I recall
that on the final day of the last class in the sequence,
the students presented Bill with a goldplated multicolor
pen with the inscription “nature is not vicious” because
that was the phrase he often used when the math got really complicated. When Bill died a few years ago, his
daughter told me that she found the inscribed pen on
top of his desk.
In 1948, Dr. Birnbaum offered me a job as a research assistant in his newly established statistics laboratory, which I instantly accepted. However, I had
already accepted a position as a research assistant in
the newly formed Washington Public Opinion Poll
(WPOL), which was housed in the sociology department, and where I was becoming acquainted with sampling and sample survey methods. So during 1948,
I had distinct appointments in the sociology and mathematics departments which I believe was quite unusual
at the time and may have been illegal.
Graubard: I suppose that kind of interdisciplinary
type work would be encouraged now; back then it must
have been pretty unusual.
Sirken: Yes, I believe it was quite unusual in those
days. I was just plain lucky to be in the right place at
the right time. It happened because George Lundberg,
Chair of Sociology Department, encouraged interdisciplinary research at the intersection of the social and

639

mathematical sciences, and Z. W. Birnbaum was willing to take a chance on a social scientist.
Graubard: Professor Birnbaum is well known for
his theoretical contributions in mathematics and statistics. It’s unusual, I would think, for someone with your
background to work at his level.
Sirken: I could not and did not work with Bill on
those kinds of problems. He helped me solve my applied statistical problems, and my problem then was
measuring “bias due to nonresponse in sample surveys.” It so happened that my survey research problem was nested in Bill’s broader interest in truncated
population distributions. We successfully derived the
expression the mean squared error that minimized the
joint effects of sampling and nonresponse bias in survey estimates of categorical variables (Birnbaum and
Sirken, 1950).
I worked in Bill’s laboratory for two years, and wrote
my thesis under his direction. Bill taught me how to
think in terms of statistical models. That was an invaluable gift.
Graubard: What did you do after completing your
Ph.D.?
Sirken: Well, I got the Ph.D. in June, 1950 and
stayed in Bill’s laboratory that summer working on the
problem of optimizing the scheduling of call-backs of
survey interviewers. I got this idea while writing the
Ph.D. thesis on bias due to nonresponse in sample surveys. I learned much later that it was a linear programming problem.
POST-DOCTORAL FELLOWSHIP AND FIRST JOB

Graubard: What was your first position after getting the Ph.D.?
Sirken: In the fall of 1950, I headed to the Statistics
Laboratory at the University of California, Berkeley. I
had a Social Science Research Council Post-Doctoral
Fellowship and was planning to spend most of the next
12 months at Berkeley. I took courses that fall and
the following spring from Jerzy Neyman and Erich
Lehman and consulted while there with Ed Barankin.
Ed thought he might have the solution to my linear programming problem, which I had originally solved for
relatively simple situations, but I was unsuccessful in
applying his theory. I left Berkeley in June, 1951.
Graubard: So that was a case when theory didn’t
solve a practical problem for you. After working at
Berkeley for eight or nine months, what did you do?
Sirken: I was pretty sure that I wanted to learn more
about sampling and survey research and what better

640

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

place to get that kind of experience than at the U.S.
Census Bureau. So I continued my fellowship there.
Graubard: Whom did you work with at the Census
Bureau?
Sirken: Well, I was located in Morris Hansen’s office. The staff included really outstanding people including Bill Hurwitz, Joe Daly, Max Bershad and Margaret Gurney. These people were part of the central
staff and there were others also technically responsible to Morris who worked throughout the Bureau including Joe Steinberg, Joe Waksberg and Harold Nisselson, to name a few. However, I was mostly involved
with a small group of survey methodologists including Eli Marks and Leon Pritzker who were working on
the Post-Enumeration Survey (PES). The PES evaluated the quality of the 1950 Census of Population by
renumerating a sample of the census population. By
the time I arrived, the PES fieldwork had been completed and the staff was programming the UNIVAC to
run the PES tabulations. I was very impressed with the
research at the Census Bureau so after the post-doctoral
expired I took a job with Morris Hansen’s group. I got
involved in several projects. I particularly remember
working with Hal Nisselson and Ted Woolsey on the
pretest of the National Health Survey in San Jose, California. Little did I realize then how relevant that experience would become in my future work.
Graubard: So was your academic career over?
Sirken: I didn’t think so at the time. When I arrived
at the Census Bureau in 1951, my original plan was to
stay three months and then take an academic appointment. In fact, I have been in government for over 55
years with brief visiting appointments in biostatistics
departments at University of California at Berkeley and
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
NATIONAL OFFICE OF VITAL STATISTICS

Graubard: What made you leave the Census Bureau
and work at the National Office of Vital Statistics?
Sirken: It wasn’t my decision. There was a so-called
Reduction in Force (RIF) throughout government soon
after Dwight Eisenhower moved into the White House
in 1952. I didn’t have tenure at the Census Bureau, and
was RIF’ed in midyear 1953. A couple of months later,
Morris Hansen got me a job at the National Office of
Vital Statistics (NOVS) which was quite a feat in view
of the government-wide employment freeze on outside
hires. Well, Morris Hansen and Dr. Halbert Dunn, Director of NOVS, were old friends and Morris apparently convinced Dr. Dunn that I was a very competent

actuarial mathematician. Later, when Dr. Dunn interviewed me, I noted my very limited knowledge (virtually none) in actuarial science, and luckily he thought
I was being modest.
Graubard: So you launched into an area that you
had no real experience.
Sirken: That’s right. However, I had a couple of
fine mentors. T. N. E. Greville, an outstanding actuarial mathematician and statistician who had been my
predecessor at NOVS, was an exceptionally good communicator and his publications were very helpful. Also,
Mortimer Spiegelman, a well-known demographer at
Metropolitan Life Insurance, was my collaborator in
constructing the 1950 U.S. and state life tables.
Graubard: What did you do after you finished the
life table assignment, and who did you work with?
Sirken: Unlike the U.S. Census Bureau where most
national population data are collected periodically in
censuses, at NOVS, national vital statistics (births,
deaths, marriages and divorces) are compiled as byproducts of information reported on vital records. Because vital records serve primarily as legal documents,
the information reported on vital records is necessarily limited and virtually changeless. I had an understanding with Dr. Dunn that after completing the life
tables I would work on sample survey methods to improve vital statistics. In 1955, just after the life table
project was completed, I had a chance to do just that
when Bill Haenszel, a well-known epidemiologist at
the National Cancer Institute (NCI), proposed a collaborative research project in which NOVS would design and test sample survey methodologies to collect
retrospective residence and smoking histories for samples of deceased persons from their surviving relatives.
With funding support from NCI, a small statistical unit,
including Mort Brown and Jim Pifer and myself and
a clerical staff, was established in NOVS to conduct
Haenszel’s pilot study. Soon after the successful completion of that pilot, NOVS established a long-range
research sample survey program to expand the scope
and improve the quality of vital statistics by conducting
retrospective sample surveys linked to birth and death
records (Sirken, 1963).
Graubard: So you were using the idea that people
like Morris Hanson had promoted at the Census Bureau that by sampling you could expand the scope and
improve the quality of vital statistics.
Sirken: The NOVS survey program was sustained
by conducting work for other government agencies.
For example, Haenszel expanded the lung cancer pilot
study into a national mortality survey, and he arranged

A CONVERSATION WITH MONROE SIRKEN

with the Census Bureau to collect information on
smoking and residence histories for the national population in the Current Population Survey (CPS). Thus,
we were able to estimate national lung cancer death
rates by smoking habits and residence histories (Haenszel, Loveland and Sirken, 1962). As I recall, these
findings were cited in the first report of the Surgeon
General on Smoking and Health.
Graubard: And actually that’s one of the first examples of a population-based case-control study, where
the mortality follow-back survey provided exposure
and other covariate information for the lung cancer
cases and the CPS provided these variables for the control sample of the population at risk.
Sirken: Exactly. I have always felt that the linked
mortality/population sample survey methodology deserves much more attention than it has received from
epidemiologists.
Graubard: Weren’t you also involved in designing
other surveys for federal health agencies?
Sirken: Yes. NOVS developed the methodology of
the follow-back surveys linked to birth records, and
with funding from the Division of Radiological Health,
U.S. Public Health Service, conducted the first national
natality survey on the exposure of pregnant women to
medical radiation. With funding from the U.S. Public Health Service, NOVS contracted with the Census Bureau for a CPS supplement on the population’s
utilization of the Salk vaccine. Using data from the
CPS polio supplement, NOVS produced the first national statistics on the utilization and effectiveness of
the Salk vaccine (Sirken, 1962). Thereafter, the Public Health Service often used the CPS supplements to
monitor the immunization status of the national population. On another occasion, the U.S. Children’s Bureau asked NOVS to conduct a survey on the prevalence of cystic fibrosis, a debilitating and often lethal
pediatric disease, and to do so within something like
a hundred days in order to comply with a Congressional request. An unexpected estimation problem in
that medical provider survey ultimately led to the development of a new kind of sampling called network
sampling. These were very exciting days when the
findings of the NOVS sample surveys were used in real
time to address important public health problems.
Graubard: Much of your own early research and
research collaborations involved measuring the quality
of survey data. How did this come about?
Sirken: Well, it started with my thesis and continued with my work at the Census Bureau. Also, my
training in demography was a factor. I tended to think

641

about the demographic aspects of survey measurement
errors, and in the back of my mind I wondered how information about the population being surveyed could
be used in the survey measurement process to reduce
sampling and measurement errors. This way of thinking helped me to recognize and exploit research opportunities that I might otherwise have overlooked.
Graubard: That way of thinking explains how you
got involved in research on network sampling and the
cognitive aspects of survey methods. Both areas seek to
improve the survey quality by using information about
the population being surveyed. It seems to me that you
took almost a personal responsibility for the total quality of your surveys—sampling and nonsampling errors.
Sirken: I guess so. Generally, NOVS was not responsible for survey data analyses. That was the responsibility of the contracting agency. But NOVS was
responsible for describing the data limitations, both
sampling and nonsampling errors, and we took those
responsibilities very seriously.
EARLY DAYS AT THE NATIONAL CENTER FOR
HEALTH STATISTICS

Graubard: When and why did you leave NOVS?
Sirken: In 1960, NOVS was merged with the National Health Survey (NHS) to form the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). Without any action
on my part, I became a charter member of the NCHS,
though for a couple of years afterward I remained in
NOVS, which was renamed the Division of Vital Statistics (DVS). The NHS was the other NCHS division.
The NHS, located in the Office of the Surgeon General, was chartered in 1956 and was responsible for
the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)—a large
national face-to-face household survey that was and is
still fielded by the Census Bureau. You may recall that
at the Bureau in 1952, I had worked on the NHIS San
Jose pretest, and next year NHIS will be celebrating its
50th anniversary.
The NCHS is the official federal agency responsible for producing national health statistics, and it is
noteworthy that the Congressional Act that created
the NCHS empowered NCHS to develop the survey
methodology most suitable for collecting health statistics. A lot of credit for establishing the NCHS goes to
Ted Woolsey whom I believe helped draft the enabling
legislation, and he also directed the development of
the NHIS. Forrest Linder was the first NCHS Director.
He was a demographer who had formerly worked in
the Vital Statistics Division at the Census Bureau and

642

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

had recently resigned from the United Nations to become the NHS Director. I knew Forrest Linder and the
other NHS staff including Ted Woolsey, Ozzie Sagen,
Phil Lawrence, Walt Simmons and Earl Bryant because
NHS and NOVS occupied quarters in the same building and the staffs often met for lunch.
Graubard: You’ve given us an overview of the formation of the National Center for Health Statistics and
noted some of the staff. What kind of place was NCHS
in those early days?
Sirken: A very exciting place. Forrest Linder was a
good administrator and had the vision of developing a
family of national data systems that intersected all important health-related activities of the population that
would be capable of meeting the increasing needs for
national health and vital statistics. I was particularly
excited because fulfilling Forrest’s vision implied the
need for a strong survey methods research program.
Even before the NCHS was established, the NHS had
begun to conduct pilot studies of the National Health
Examination Survey, now the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)—a medical
examination survey that uses mobile medical trailers
to physically examine random samples of the national
population. When the NCHS was established, the vital record follow-back surveys became an integral part
of NCHS data systems. Soon after NCHS was established, we began to think about developing a family
of national health care provider surveys of hospitals,
physicians, clinics, home health services, etc.
As a result of an NCHS reorganization in 1963,
there were now four divisions including the Division
of Health Records Statistics (DHRS). The DHRS was
responsible for health care provider surveys and vital
record linked surveys. I became the first DHRS Director.
Graubard: What were the surveys that eventually
came out of DHRS?
Sirken: During my four years at DHRS, we established the Master Facility Inventory of Health Care
Providers, the National Hospital Discharge Survey, the
National Nursing Home Survey and the Linked Birth
Record Sample Survey.
Just before Dr. Linder retired in 1967, he appointed
me the director of the newly created Office of Statistical Methods with responsibility for directing the
NCHS survey and statistical methodology programs.
Earl Bryant was the deputy director. It was a wonderful
job and offered many opportunities. Our work was divided between serving as statistical consultants and advisors to the NCHS programs and conducting research

relevant to the mission of NCHS that emerged from the
consulting activities. We hired very talented people like
Bob Casady, Paul Levy, Iris Shimizu and you, and over
the years we welcomed input from many outstanding
statisticians including Jerzy Neyman, Z. W. Birnbaum,
Gad Nathan, Richard Royal, T. N. E. Greville, Phil McCarthy, Chin Long Chiang and Tom Jabine. Their reports were published in the NCHS Series 2 reports on
Data Evaluation and Methods Research.
Graubard: I’m curious about how you were able to
establish these research collaborations and what kind
of support did you get from NCHS.
Sirken: Of course, Center support was essential. Relationships with scientists in academia were actively
encouraged and supported by NCHS. However, I think
the key to attracting outstanding people is to have interesting problems for them to work on.
Levy: During your many years at NCHS you’ve led
a large number of projects. What have been your major
research interests and which projects do you regard as
your personal favorites?
Sirken: Methodological research conducted by federal statistical agencies is severely constrained by
short-term programmatic needs. Resources are hard
to come by to pursue many interesting problems that
emerge as by-products of short-term-oriented research.
Nevertheless, by tapping a variety of sources I was able
to obtain funds to research some interesting problems
myself and with collaborators, and to foster methodological research relevant to long-term needs of federal statistical agencies. My favorite research projects
are network sampling and integrated sample survey
design. My main efforts to foster research involved
the CASM movement, which fostered research on the
cognitive aspects of survey methodology, and a grants
program that supports investigator-initiated research
projects that are oriented to the future needs of federal
statistical agencies.
NETWORK SAMPLING

Levy: Let’s begin with network sampling. What is it
and how does it differ from conventional sampling?
Sirken: The essential difference between network
and conventional sampling is the kind of counting
rule used to link the elements of the target population to the selection units at which they are eligible
to be counted (Sirken, 1997). Conventional sampling
depends on unitary counting rules that uniquely link
each population element to one and only one selection
unit. Network sampling depends on multiplicity counting rules that do not limit the number of selection units

A CONVERSATION WITH MONROE SIRKEN

that are linked to the same population elements. For
example, conventional sampling applies in household
sample surveys that use the de jure residence rule that
uniquely links each individual to his/her usual place
of residence. On the other hand, multiplicity sampling
would apply in household sample surveys that use the
counting rule that links individuals to their de jure and
de facto residences.
Levy: The solution of the estimation problem in the
New England Cystic Fibrosis Survey ultimately led to
the development of network sampling. How did that
happen?
Sirken: In the New England Survey, the estimate of
cystic fibrosis prevalence was based on a sample survey in which medical providers reported their cystic
fibrosis patients. We did not appreciate until after the
survey was conducted that most cystic fibrosis patients
were treated by and eligible to be reported by multiple medical sources. Hence, the conventional sampling estimate of cystic fibrosis prevalence which implicitly assumes each patient is linked to one and only
one medical source would have been biased. After I
got Bill Birnbaum interested in this estimation problem, we developed three unbiased estimators of disease prevalence in stratified sample surveys of medical
providers with overlapping patient case loads (Birnbaum and Sirken, 1965). The estimators utilize information about the multiplicity of linkages between patients reported in the sample survey and their medical
providers. The simplest of the estimators, the so-called
multiplicity estimator, weights each patient report by
the inverse of the patient’s multiplicity, namely, the inverse of the number of different providers that treated
the patient.

643

Levy: I remember in your original paper with Dr.
Birnbaum, you referred to the unbiased estimation
technique as multiplicity sampling or multiplicity estimation. When did you actually begin using the term
network sampling?
Sirken: Initially, our estimation technique was applied when surveys inadvertently used multiplicity
rules and then it was called multiplicity estimation or
multiplicity sampling. After demonstrating that multiplicity sampling is potentially more efficient than conventional sampling, I realized that our estimation technique also applied when multiplicity rules were deliberately used to improve sample survey efficiency
(Sirken, 1970) especially in surveys of rare and elusive populations (Sudman, Sirken and Cowan, 1988).
I coined the expression network sampling because the
precision gains of using multiplicity instead of unitary
rules depend on the statistical properties of the networks formed by the linkages between population elements and selection units. For example, assume the
rare disease prevalence survey is based on a simple
random sample of persons. In conventional sampling,
each person responds for himself or herself. Suppose in
network sampling, in addition to each person responding for himself, the person’s siblings respond for him.
Assuming all patients have the same number of siblings, k, and at most one sibling has the disease, the ratio of the sampling errors of network and conventional
sampling is approximately the inverse of k.
Network sampling also has potential to improve the
accuracy of survey estimates of household surveys of
sensitive populations where the reports of close friends
and relatives may be more accurate than those of the

F IG . 2. NCHS Seminar 1984. Front row l. to r.: Gad Nathan, Judy Lessler, Keith Eberhardt. Second row l. to r.: Monroe Sirken, Morris
Hansen, Ben Tepping, Bob Fay.

644

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

persons themselves, and in household surveys of elusive populations that are not linked to single places of
residence. However, care must be taken in selecting the
“right” counting rule because the rule that increases
precision often decreases accuracy.
Levy: Is that what you meant by the “counting rule
strategy”?
Sirken: Exactly. The counting rule strategy involves
selecting the counting rule (unitary or multiplicity),
which together with the other survey design features
minimizes the mean square error of the survey estimate
for fixed costs. Selecting the optimum counting rules
requires a good demographic and sociologic knowledge of the target populations.
Levy: What kinds of survey experiments did you do
to test the counting rule strategy, and who were your
collaborators?
Sirken: The experiments compared the sampling
and nonsampling errors of conventional and network
sampling in household sample surveys of rare and
sensitive populations—the kinds of surveys that often
challenge conventional sampling. The rare population
experiments were cancer and diabetes prevalence, and
birth, marriage and death incidence. The sensitive issue
experiments were alcohol and illicit drug use. In these
experiments, the de jure residence rule was compared
with multiplicity counting rules that incorporate the de
jure rule. In the alcohol and illicit drug use surveys,
for example, the multiplicity rules were based on self
and friendship linkages, and in the rare population surveys, multiplicity rules were based on self and kinship
linkages. For example, Trish Royston and I worked on
the design effects counting rules in mortality surveys
(Royston and Sirken, 1978).
Levy: Didn’t one experiment involve an NCHS data
system?
Sirken: Yes, an experiment was embedded in an
NHIS supplement on diabetes which used multiplicity
rules based on self and kinship relationships with parents, children and siblings. NHIS respondents reported
whether they or close relatives had diabetes, and then
reported the multiplicities of each reported diabetic. As
I recall, diabetes prevalence estimates based on kinship rules were substantially larger and considerably
closer to independent sources of diabetes prevalence
estimates, and the network sampling errors were about
half as large as the conventional sampling errors. Barry
Graubard and I worked on this project.
Levy: As I recall, you and your collaborators were
also busy expanding network sampling theory.

Sirken: Because network sampling does not specify rules for selecting samples, technically speaking it
is not a sampling technique—it is an estimation technique. In our original paper, Bill Birnbaum and I developed three unbiased estimators for stratified network
sample surveys. Much of our work in expanding network sampling theory involved applying network sampling in more complex and novel sample survey designs, and deriving the unbiased estimators and variances. For example, you and I collaborated in deriving the unbiased estimator and variance of ratios of
random variables in stratified network sample surveys
(Sirken and Levy, 1974), and Bob Casady and I collaborated with Gad Nathan of Hebrew University on
the network sampling designs of dual system surveys
(Casady, Nathan and Sirken, 1985). Also, I did some
work on the components of variance of multiplicity estimators (Sirken, 1972).
INTEGRATED SURVEY DESIGN

Levy: Network sampling research at NCHS was interrupted in the early 1980s. What happened?
Sirken: NCHS was quite a different place in the late
1970s and early 1980s than when established in 1960,
and new kinds of research problems were emerging.
I was Associate Director of Research and Methodology
and the Director of the Office of Research and Methodology and Jim Massey, Andy White and Bob Casady
succeeded by Randy Curtin were section chiefs.

F IG . 3. Monroe Sirken as NCHS’s Associate Director of Research and Methodology, 1980.

A CONVERSATION WITH MONROE SIRKEN

F IG . 4.

Dr. Albert Einstein and admirer, 1983.

By the early 1980s, the three major NCHS health
surveys, the NHIS, the health care provider surveys,
and the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) were well established. Additionally, two new population sample surveys had been successfully fielded—the National Medical Expenditure
Survey (NMES) and the National Survey of Family
Growth Survey (NSFG). Some surveys, such as the
NHIS, were continuous and others, like the NMES and
the NSFG, were conducted periodically. Each survey
had been independently designed and was being independently implemented. Dorothy Rice, then NCHS
Director, established a Periodicity Committee of the
Center’s senior staff to recommend ways to reschedule
the periodicity of conducting the Center’s data systems
in order to be able to maintain existing programs and
undertake new programs. The Periodicity report compared the consequences of several short-term periodicity plans, and mentioned a long-term research plan
which envisioned the possibility of integrating the sample designs of NCHS’s independently designed population sample surveys.
Levy: How did you intend to integrate NCHS’s data
systems and what made you think it would work?
Sirken: We proposed to use the NHIS listings of
households and persons as the master sampling frame
for NCHS’s other population-based sample surveys including the NHANES, NMES and NSFG (Sirken and
Greenberg, 1983). Subsequently, the proposal was expanded, I believe at Iris Shimizu’s suggestion, to nest
the health care provider surveys in the NHIS primary
sampling units (psu’s). There were several reasons why
it made sense to use the NHIS as the hub of the integrated survey design system. With almost 50,000
households interviewed annually, NHIS was by far the

645

largest of the NCHS population sample surveys and
provided opportunities to oversample relatively small
population domains, like race and ethnicity. Consistently high response rates, greater than 90%, assured
that NHIS sampling frames would be relatively complete. Also, the NHIS collects a vast amount of health
and related data about individuals and households that
are relevant to the analytic objectives of NCHS’s other
population surveys.
Levy: So what happened next?
Sirken: There were confidentiality and funding
problems. The NHIS is conducted for NCHS by the
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Following each Decennial Population Census, the Census Bureau selects the
NHIS household samples for the next decade. The
penultimate sampling stage of that sampling process
involves using the listings of households enumerated
in the Decennial Population Census and that posed a
serious administrative problem for the proposed integrated survey design because Census household listings are considered confidential Census data. Hence,
any surveys that might in the future be linked to the
NHIS would have to be conducted by the Census Bureau because the addresses of the NHIS households
could not be disclosed to other contractors. I thought
this restriction was incompatible with the development
of a robust integrated survey design program, so prior
to redesigning the NHIS based on the 1980 Decennial
Population Census, I proposed using an area sampling
method that did not depend on Census listings. The Bureau was perfectly willing to use area sampling instead
of Census listings but said that it would be substantially
more expensive—something like an additional million
dollars.
I proposed the integrated sample design program and
the NHIS sample design change to Dorothy Rice and
she approved it. The next problem was how to get
the additional million dollars needed for the NHIS redesign. The money was not included in the existing
or future NCHS fiscal year budgets, and as I recall,
the budget requests had already been transmitted to
the Assistant Secretary for Health. With administrative
help from Marjorie Greenberg, then working in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health, the justification for the amended budget request went forward and
Congress appropriated the additional funds.
Levy: How did you implement the integrated survey
design?
Sirken: Beginning in 1985, the first year that the
area-based NHIS redesign was implemented, large pilot surveys were conducted using NHIS household and

646

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

person listings as sampling frames for the NMES and
NSFG. In these surveys, minority households were
oversampled. The pilot studies demonstrated that integrated survey design was feasible and more efficient
than the independently designed NMES and NSFG,
and subsequently both surveys were linked to the
NHIS. Currently, the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, the NMES successor, conducted by Agency for
Health Care Research and Quality, continues to use
NHIS person and household listings as the sampling
frames.
Levy: Integrated survey design research ultimately
led you back to network sampling. How did that come
about?
Sirken: In the early 1990s, a Panel of the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) reviewed NCHS’s
plans for redesigning the health care provider surveys
with samples of medical providers embedded in a subset of the NHIS psu’s as proposed by the integrated
survey design. Though the Panel liked the idea of linking sample designs of the health care provider surveys to the NHIS, it favored linkage at the health care
provider level rather than at the psu level. In essence,
the Panel proposed substituting the listings of health
care providers reported by NHIS households for the
complete sampling frames that listed all providers then
in use by the health care provider surveys. With the
nation’s health care delivery system undergoing rapid
change, the Panel felt that the NHIS-generated sampling frames would be easier to construct and maintain
than the complete sampling frames.
In response to the Panel’s proposal, NCHS initiated a
research project that investigated the feasibility and efficiency of the Population Based Establishment Survey
(PBES)—an establishment survey that uses a population survey-generated sampling frame. One of our first
tasks was to derive expressions of a two-stage PBES
unbiased estimator and variance of the volume of transactions between households and establishments. The
problem eluded solution when the PBES was modeled as an establishment sample survey, but was easily
solved subsequently when the PBES was modeled as
a network sample household survey using a multiplicity rule that links an establishment’s transactions with
all households to every household with which the establishment has transactions (Sirken, Shimizu and Judkins, 1995). The PBES estimator and variance may be
viewed as the two-stage cluster sampling adaptation of
the multiplicity estimator and variance originally proposed by Dr. Birnbaum and myself.

COGNITIVE ASPECTS OF SURVEY
METHODOLOGY

Willis: What is CASM?
Sirken: CASM is the acronym of the Cognitive Aspects of Survey Methodology. CASM research is interdisciplinary and applies the theories and methods of
the cognitive sciences in survey research.
Willis: Why would you, a mathematical statistician
in a federal statistical agency, become interested in
CASM?
Sirken: There was always a concern about the response error effects of NCHS’s survey questionnaires,
and considerable effort went into designing questionnaires to make them as accurate and as respondentfriendly as possible. My Office of Research and Methodology (ORM) reviewed the questionnaires designed
by NCHS staffs, and it was a difficult task because
questionnaire design is a craft rather than a science.
I was ready and eager to embrace any scientific discipline that could provide a more scientific basis for
survey questionnaire design.
Willis: Do you recall the time and circumstances
when you first became interested in cognition and survey research?
Sirken: About 1980, I attended a two-day workshop convened by the Bureau of Justice Statistics that
discussed the potential uses of cognitive methods to
improve reporting of victimization by household respondents in the National Crime Survey. The workshop
introduced me to a recent paradigm change in psychology with the two-stage stimulus/response model being
replaced by a three-stage stimulus/cognition/response
model with the focus on cognition and how the mind
works during the cognitive stage. I got involved in the
CASM movement in the early 1980s when I participated in the Advanced Research Seminar on the Cognitive Aspects of Survey Methodology, later known as
the CASM I Seminar.
Willis: What was the CASM I Seminar and what was
your role in it?
Sirken: The CASM I Seminar was sponsored by
CNSTAT and supported by a National Science Foundation (NSF) grant. It was organized by Judy Tanur
based on a proposal developed by Stephen Fienberg
and Miron Straf. Tom Jabine was a consultant to the
CNSTAT project. About 25 invited cognitive scientists
and statisticians attended a six-day meeting in the summer of 1983 on the eastern shore of Maryland and
a two-day follow-up session the following January in
Baltimore. Questionnaires used in several national surveys were discussed at the Seminar including those of

A CONVERSATION WITH MONROE SIRKEN

NCHS surveys, particularly NHIS. The Seminar was
essentially the start of the CASM movement to foster interdisciplinary research that benefited survey research and cognitive psychology. An important factor in the Seminar’s success was the availability of
NSF funding to support meritorious CASM research
projects that were developed at the Seminar. At the
close of the June meeting, participants were encouraged to develop CASM research proposals based on
the ideas they had presented at the Seminar.
When the CASM I Seminar reconvened, Robert
Fuchsberg, NHIS Director, and I proposed a research
project that compared two methods of designing the
questionnaires for the forthcoming NHIS supplement
on dental health. Using the traditional testing method,
the dental health questionnaire would be tested under
normal interviewing conditions in which Census enumerators interviewed NHIS respondents at their households. Using the proposed cognitive method, the dental health questionnaire would be tested in a laboratory
setting in which professionally trained staffs conducted
cognitive interviews with recruited respondents.
Willis: Was your research proposal funded by NSF?
Sirken: Initially, I was reluctant to submit our proposal to NSF because ORM staff and I were already
overcommitted. However, I happened to discuss the
proposal over lunch with Judy Lessler at the Joint Statistical Meetings in 1983 or ’84, I believe, and she was
very much interested. So after I got assurances that, if
awarded, the NSF grant could cover her expenses and
salary, and Judy got permission for a leave of absence
from Research Triangle Institute, NCHS submitted the
CASM proposal and was awarded the NSF grant. The
following summer Judy moved to Washington, DC,
and during the next year or so she, in collaboration with
Roger Torangeau and Bill Salter, directed the CASM
experiment. Findings of that study were published as
the first report in the newly established series of NCHS
reports on Cognition and Survey Measurement.
Findings of the CASM experiment were unexpected.
They indicated that conventional and cognitive methods of testing the NHIS questionnaires were complementary rather than competitive as Bob Fuchsberg
and I had originally anticipated. The testing methods
exposed different rather than the same kinds of response problems. I recall meeting with Trish Royston and Debbie Trunzo, the ORM staff that reviewed
NCHS questionnaires, and discussing implications of
the experiment’s findings for their work in reviewing
NCHS questionnaires. We decided that the experimental findings implied that survey questionnaires should

647

be laboratory tested before they are field tested. I concluded that a permanent Questionnaire Design Laboratory should be established to develop NCHS questionnaires. That’s how the idea for a questionnaire design
research laboratory was born.
ORM’s proposal to establish a permanent Questionnaire Design Research Laboratory (QDRL) was approved by the NCHS Director, Dr. Manning Feinlieb,
and ORM was given additional space for the Laboratory. The QDRL was established in 1985 with Trish
Royston and Debbie Trunzo as co-directors. They deserve a lot of credit for the success of the QDRL. Testing and developing the questionnaires of the NHIS supplements, which changed annually, became the centerpiece of the Laboratory’s work schedule. Laboratory
methods were very successful in detecting and eliminating the kinds of glitches in survey questionnaires
that are often missed in field testing. Soon requests to
test the questionnaires of other federal agencies far exceeded the Laboratory’s capacity and larger quarters
and staff were allotted. News of the success of NCHS’s
QDRL spread quickly to other federal statistical agencies, and soon the Bureau of the Census and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics established their own laboratories.
Currently, cognitive testing of survey questionnaires
is the common practice and several federal statistical
agencies, here and abroad, have in-house questionnaire
testing facilities.
Later, the NCHS, in collaboration with NSF, established the National Laboratory for Collaborative Research in Cognition and Survey Measurement (Sirken,
1991). It had two components. The QDRL was one
component. It tested and designed the data collection instruments of federal surveys and was funded by
NCHS and by the reimbursable work the Laboratory
did for other agencies. Linda Pickle and Doug Hermann did pioneering work in the QDRL on the cognitive aspects of designing statistical maps. The second component, the Collaborative Research Program,
was funded by the NSF, and fostered basic research on
cognitive issues germane to improving data collection
instruments of federal surveys. It included a Contract
Research Program headed by Jared Jobe and a Visiting
Scientist Program. About ten CASM research projects
were completed before the Collaborative Research Program expired in the early 1990s. Findings of these research projects appear in NCHS Series 6 reports on
“Cognition and Survey Measurement.”
Willis: I recall working with you and Gad Nathan on
a project funded by the Visiting Scientist Program.

648

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

F IG . 5.

CASM II Seminar, 1996. From l. to r.: Judy Tanner, Norman Bradburn, Barbara Wilson, Susan Schechter, Monroe Sirken.

Sirken: Yes, Gad was a Visiting Scientist from the
Hebrew University and the project was “Cognitive Aspects of Designing Sensitive Survey Questions.” Our
experiments compared cognitive and behavioral theories of the likelihood of truthful response (LTS) in surveys on illicit drug use. We did not actually recruit drug
users in the Laboratory, but asked laboratory subjects
to respond to survey questionnaires as if they were the
drug users depicted in vignettes. In brief, the cognitive theory posited that the LTS depends on the drug
users’ perceptions of the disclosure risks of truthful response and the consequences, and the behavioral theory posited that the LTS depends on two survey features, the type of illicit drug (marijuana or cocaine)
and the extent of privacy protection (confidentiality
or anonymity) the survey provided. The comparisons
slightly favored the cognitive theory.
Willis: So overall did the Laboratory work out as
you had hoped?
Sirken: Yes and no. The influence and success of the
QDRL in applying cognitive techniques to design survey questionnaires far exceeded my expectations. On
the other hand, I regret the demise of the Collaborative Research Program in NCHS and wish it could be
revived. It was great while it lasted.
Willis: There was also the CASM II Seminar in
1996. How did that develop and what were its objectives?
Sirken: About 1993, the tenth anniversary of the
CASM I Seminar, I proposed convening a CASM II
Seminar to expand the scope of CASM research beyond questionnaire design to other survey design features, and to expand the scope of interdisciplinary re-

lationships beyond cognitive psychology to other disciplines. The CASM II Seminar was jointly funded by
NSF and NCHS. It was organized by a planning committee of interdisciplinary-minded survey researchers,
and was managed and supported by ORM staff, especially Susan Schechter and Karen Whitaker and Tom
Jabine, an ORM consultant. The six-day Seminar met
in Charlottesville, Virginia during June, 1996 and featured 15 commissioned papers by survey methodologists and cognitive scientists, which along with remarks of discussants appear in the book published by
Wiley (Sirken et al., 1999).
Like the CASM I Seminar, the CASM II Seminar sought to develop interdisciplinary research project
proposals. Unfortunately, funding was unavailable to
support CASM II research proposals. Even before the
CASM II Seminar convened, I was beating the bushes
looking for funds.
Willis: And that’s how you got involved in the Funding Opportunity in Survey Research?
THE FUNDING OPPORTUNITY IN SURVEY
RESEARCH

Sirken: A potential source of funding for CASM
II research proposals surfaced toward the end of the
CASM Seminar II when Cheryl Eavey, Head of NSF’s
Methodology, Measurement and Statistics program,
offered to administer and fund a grants program in basic survey research for a three-year period if a consortium of federal statistical agencies provided matching
funds. After some false starts, I took NSF’s proposal
to the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology

A CONVERSATION WITH MONROE SIRKEN

F IG . 6.

649

NCHS Questionnaire Design Research Laboratory, 2006. From l. to r.: Monroe Sirken, Mary Moien, Barry Graubard.

(FCSM), an interagency committee of federal statisticians to which I belong, and requested its help in recruiting a consortium of federal statistical agencies to
put up the matching funds.
Willis: How did FCSM react to the NSF proposal?
Sirken: FCSM appointed a research subcommittee
to draft a proposal to the Interagency Committee on
Statistical Policy (ICSP), a committee of the directors of about 15 of the largest federal statistical agencies. Thirteen ICSP agencies agreed to individually
support the Funding Opportunity during a three-year
period and in January, 1999, the NSF issued the first
announcement of the Funding Opportunity in Survey
Research, a grants program in interdisciplinary survey
and statistical research that is oriented to the future
methodological needs of federal statistical agencies. In
2001, the ICSP agencies and the MMS extended their
agreement beyond 2002.
Willis: Is the Funding Opportunity working out as
you hoped?
Sirken: During its initial seven years, 1999–2006,
the Funding Opportunity made grants totaling more
than four million dollars and supported about 25
investigator-initiated research projects. It is too early to
assess the long-term contributions of these projects, but
I’m optimistic. Arguably the most outstanding early
achievement of the Funding Opportunity has been the
successful development of the infrastructure of a complex grants program that is oriented to long-term needs
of the federal statistical system, and is funded jointly
by a consortium of federal statistical agencies and the
NSF and administered jointly by the FCSM research
committee and the NSF. The Funding Opportunity provides a vehicle for statistical agencies in our decentral-

ized federal statistical system to collaborate in funding
methodological research which none of them could individually afford. It provides the FCSM with a vehicle
to carry out its basic mission of improving the quality of federal statistics. Yes, I would say, the Funding
Opportunity has worked better than I ever imagined in
fostering basic survey research that is oriented to the
needs of federal statistical agencies.
RECENT YEARS: 1996–

Willis: I think we have pretty well covered your major activities until the late 1990s. What have you been
doing lately?
Sirken: I have been a Senior Research Scientist at
NCHS during the past ten years. I spend full time conducting and fostering survey and statistical research as
I no longer have administrative or policy responsibilities. I divide my time between conducting statistical
research mostly on network sampling, often in collaboration with Iris Shimizu (Sirken and Shimizu, 2007),
and fostering interdisciplinary survey research, mostly
as chair of the FCSM Research Committee that steers,
oversees and evaluates activities of the Funding Opportunity in Survey and Statistical Research (Sirken,
2004). I find the work of conducting and fostering scientific research very satisfying and highly recommend
that combination of activities to senior scientists.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many thanks to Mary Moien for organizing and
coordinating the conversation, to Karen Whitaker for
making arrangements to conduct the conversation in
the NCHS Questionnaire Design Research Laboratory,

650

B. I. GRAUBARD, P. S. LEVY AND G. R. WILLIS

and to Debbie Trunzo, Ed Korn and Tom Fears for editorial comments. Opinions expressed in this conversation are Monroe’s and do not necessarily represent the
views of the National Center for Health Statistics.
REFERENCES
B IRNBAUM , Z. W. and S IRKEN , M. G. (1950). Bias due to nonavailability in sample surveys. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 45 98–
111.
B IRNBAUM , Z. W. and S IRKEN , M. G. (1965). Design of sample
surveys to estimate the prevalence of rare diseases: Three unbiased estimates. National Center of Health Statistics Series 2
No. 11. MR0523738
C ASADY, R. J., NATHAN , G. and S IRKEN , M. G. (1985). Alternative dual system network estimators. Internat. Statist. Rev. 53
183–197. MR0959037
H AENSZEL , W., L OVELAND , D. B. and S IRKEN , M. G. (1962).
Lung cancer mortality as related to residence and smoking histories. I. White males. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 28 947–1001.
ROYSTON , P. N., S IRKEN , M. G. and B ERGSTEN , J. (1978).
Bias and sampling errors of mortality counts based on network
surveys. In Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Social Statistics Section 471–475. Amer. Statist. Assoc.,
Alexandria, VA.
S IRKEN , M. G. (1962). National participation trends, 1955–61 in
the poliomyelitis vaccination program. Public Health Reports
77 661–670.
S IRKEN , M. G. (1963). Research uses of vital records in vital statistics surveys. Milbank Mem. Fund Quar. 41 309–316.

S IRKEN , M. G. (1970). Household surveys with multiplicity. J.
Am. Statist. Assoc. 65 257–266.
S IRKEN , M. G. (1972). Variance components of multiplicity estimators. Biometrics 28 869–873.
S IRKEN , M. G. (1991). The role of a cognitive laboratory in a statistical agency. In Statistical Policy 20 268–277. Office of Management and Budget.
S IRKEN , M. G. (1997). Network sampling. In Encyc. of Biostat.
2977–2986. Wiley, New York.
S IRKEN , M. G. (2004). Charting the interdisciplinary history of
the funding opportunity in survey and statistical research. Statistical Policy Working Paper 36. Available at http://www.fcsm.
gov/reports.
S IRKEN , M. G. and G REENBERG , M. (1983). Redesign and integration of the population based health survey program. In
Proceedings of the 44th Session of the Internat. Statist. Inst.
Madrid.
S IRKEN , M. G. and L EVY, P. S. (1974). Multiplicity estimation of
proportions based on ratios of random variables. J. Amer. Statist.
Assoc. 69 68–73.
S IRKEN , M. G., S HIMIZU , I. M. and J UDKINS , D. (1995). Population based establishment surveys. In Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Section on Survey Research Methods 470–473.
S IRKEN , M. G., H ERMANN , D. J., S CHECHTER , S., S CHWARTZ ,
N., TANUR , J. and T ORANGEAU , R., eds. (1999). Cognition
and Survey Research. Wiley, New York.
S IRKEN , M. G. and S HIMIZU , I. M. (2007). Linked surveys of
health services utilization. Statistics in Medicine 26 1788–1801.
S UDMAN , S., S IRKEN , M. G. and C OWAN , C. D. (1988). Sampling rare and elusive populations. Science 240 991–996.

