CAUSAL EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED IMMUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS
D. James Greiner and Donald B. Rubin*
Abstract—Despite their ubiquity, observational studies to infer the causal
effect of a so-called immutable characteristic, such as race or sex, have struggled for coherence, given the unavailability of a manipulation analogous to
a “treatment” in a randomized experiment and the danger of posttreatment
bias. We demonstrate that a shift in focus from actual traits to perceptions
of them can address both of these issues while facilitating articulation of
other critical concepts, particularly the timing of treatment assignment. We
illustrate concepts by discussing the designs of various studies of the role
of race in trial court death penalty decisions.

I.

Introduction

W

E discuss the prerequisites for the design of an observational study to infer the causal effect of a so-called
immutable characteristic, such as race or sex. Despite their
ubiquity, such studies have struggled for theoretical coherence because of, among other things, the impossibility of
manipulating such traits in a way analogous to administering a treatment in a randomized experiment and the danger
of posttreatment bias stemming from the fact that almost
all variables on which a researcher would like to condition
are determined after an individual’s conception. Because of
these issues, prominent scholars (Holland, 1986a; Winship
& Sobel, 1999; Freedman, 2004; Berk, 2004) contend that it
is inappropriate to conceptualize a person’s actual race, sex,
or national origin as a treatment in an observational study
and that attempts to infer the causal effects of such traits are
incoherent.
Here, we articulate how to draw causal inferences with
respect to immutable characteristics. We argue that a shift
in focus from actual traits to perceptions of them allows a
researcher to address both of these problems while simultaneously facilitating sharp articulation of necessary assumptions.
Our discussion has practical consequences. For example, we
demonstrate that one cannot coherently study the effect of
victim or defendant race on jury assignment of capital punishment without including acquittals in the analysis data set,
despite numerous studies that fail to do so. Similarly, we
suggest that even certain kinds of randomization will not
allow causal inference of the effect of a judge’s sex on case
outcomes despite studies attempting to do so.
We ground our discussion within the potential outcomes
framework of causation ((Neyman, 1990) in the context

Received for publication March 12, 2009. Revision accepted for publication March 5, 2010.
* Greiner: Harvard Law School; Rubin: Harvard University.
We extend great thanks to Richard Berk, Gabriella Blum, Rachel Brewster, Stephen Fienberg, Franklin Fisher, Andrew Gelman, Adam Glynn,
Don Greiner, Ellen Greiner, Sam Gross, Daniel Ho, Louis Kaplow, Michael
Kellerman, Gary King, Jennifer Lewis, Adriaan Lanni, Xiao-Li Meng,
Kevin Quinn, Jed Shugerman, Ben Sachs, Matthew Stephenson, Jeff Strnad, Elizabeth Stuart, Jeannie Suk, Chris Winship, and Alan Zaslavsky
for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. No one mentioned
necessarily endorses the statements herein. We also thank two anonymous
reviewers for their constructive comments.

of randomization-based inference in randomized experiments, and Rubin (1974, 1978) more generally, including
for Bayesian inference in randomized studies), also called
the Rubin causal model (Holland, 1986a). We nevertheless
believe the concepts discussed, particularly the presumptive
timing of treatment assignment we identify, are equally applicable and useful to other causal paradigms (Pearl, 2000;
Heckman, 2005). Although we draw our examples primarily
from antidiscrimination law, the issues we discuss are applicable to studies in economics, sociology, political science,
and other fields.
A preview and slight oversimplification of our thinking,
using race as an example, is as follows. When assessing whether intentional discrimination (what the law labels
“disparate treatment”) has occurred, researchers are often
interested in whether the decisions of what we call a
“decider”—a particular person or an institutional actor—
are made without regard to race. Under this formulation,
perceived race is not an immutable characteristic because
one can hypothesize interventions that might change the
decider’s perceptions. Such interventions are of only indirect
concern, however, because the researcher does not contemplate manipulating perceptions of race and therefore does not
contemplate implementing the treatment whose effects are
under study. A key benefit of this formulation is that it identifies the presumptive timing of treatment assignment as the
moment the decider first perceives a unit’s race. This moment,
which occurs long after the unit’s conception, allows (indeed,
requires) the researcher to consider pretreatment variables as
covariates. And the entire structure allows sharp articulation
of critical assumptions.
For the remainder of this paper, we assume familiarity with
the following concepts: units, treatments, timing of treatment assignment, outcome variables, covariates (observed
and unobserved), intermediate outcomes, assignment mechanism, ignorability, posttreatment-adjustment bias, the stable
unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA; Rubin, 1980a),
and the fundamental problem of causal inference. For readers
unfamiliar with any of these terms, summaries are available
in Rubin (1978, 2006b), Holland (1986b), Imbens and Rubin
(2006), Gelman and Hill (2007).
II.

Previous Arguments

For analysts from a variety of fields, the intensely practical
goal of causal inference is to discover what would happen if
we changed the world in some way (Holland, 2003). This
understanding has several consequences discussed in detail
elsewhere: the maxim, “No causation without manipulation”
(Rubin, 1975); the randomized experiment’s status as the
gold standard for causal inference; and the imperative to
analyze observational data by reconstructing a hypothetical

The Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2011, 93(3): 775–785
© 2011 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

776

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

randomized experiment by (among other things) separating
covariates from intermediate outcomes and balancing covariates between treatment and control groups (Cochran & Rubin,
1973; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Rubin, 2007a).
The emphasis on manipulation has led some scholars (Holland, 1986a; Winship & Sobel, 1999; Freedman, 2004; Berk,
2004) to contend that it is inappropriate to conceptualize a
person’s actual race, sex, or national origin as a treatment
in an observational study. Holland (2003) in particular distinguishes “properties” or “attributes,” such as race and sex,
from “causes,” such as a pill. The objection to studying causal
effects of attributes has two aspects. First, attributes are not
subject to change by intervention. Second, some properties
(including immutable characteristics) are determined at a person’s conception, and thus almost all measurable variables
specific to a unit are posttreatment: “For example, because
I am a White person, it would be close to ridiculous to ask
what would have happened to me had I been Black” (Holland, 2003). Note that such arguments may implicitly adopt
a biological definition of immutable characteristics.
Meanwhile, other scholars have explored the idea that perceptions of immutable characteristics, not the “actual” traits
(to the extent that the latter are well defined), are what matter
and that perceptions are manipulable. Social psychologists
have experimented with manipulations involving race in the
lab (for a review and an analysis of cognitive mechanisms,
see Cosmides, Tooby, & Kurzban, 2003). Researchers have
also discussed (Berk, 2004) and implemented manipulations
of variables closely associated to traits. For example, analysts
have manipulated names associated with political speeches
(Sapiro, 1981–1982) or résumés (Bertrand & Mullainathan,
2004), although these variables may also be closely associated with other and less legally problematic variables such
as socioeconomic status or education. Other scholars have
explored the effect of interventions that remove a decider’s
ability to perceive a trait (for example, placing a screen in
front of auditioning musicians, Goldin & Rouse, 2000). Thus,
the idea that perceptions matter and can be manipulated is
not new. Nevertheless, nothing in this literature articulates
the definitions and assumptions needed for causal inference
regarding the effects of perceived immutable characteristics
via an observational study.
To our knowledge, Fienberg and Haviland (2003) provide
the first explicit discussions of perceptions as opposed to
actual traits in a causal inference framework. They note that
perceptions may be manipulable and discuss both the need to
observe variables sufficient to justify an ignorability assumption, as well as the advantages of matching methods in this
area. Some excellent work that we have seen on the subject we address here is Kaufman (2008), who discusses the
importance of a decision maker (whom we call the “decider”)
and distinguishes inferences about the effect of race on such a
person or entity’s decisions, which may be rigorously conceptualized, with inferences about other aspects of race, which
may not be. We developed this idea independently from Kaufman (see Greiner, 2007), and it is a cornerstone of proper

thinking in this area. It is not the only cornerstone, however.
Work remains to be done, among other things, to answer
Holland’s objections articulated above; to address the timing
of treatment assignment; separate covariates from intermediate outcomes; and articulate the meaning of the stability
assumption.
III.

Perceptions

A shift in emphasis to perceptions of immutable characteristics allows some well-defined causal questions to be posed
and, within the limits of observational studies, inferences to
be drawn. At a minimum, it is possible and useful to identify
a set of assumptions that allows causal analysis. If some find
the assumptions we state too strong to accept as plausible,
we sympathize. We do not intend to minimize the difficulties
involved.
To answer the first primary objection to considering
immutable characteristics as “treatments” as opposed to
“attributes,” the unavailability of a manipulation, one must
ask the following question: Why does causal inference
by the potential outcomes framework typically require the
researcher to specify an intervention, real or hypothetical?
The answer is that a researcher typically has some desired
state of the world he wishes to realize, and that whether a
contemplated intervention will further progress toward that
state of the world can depend critically on the intervention’s
precise nature. For example, analysts attempt to study the
effect on test scores of sending children to Catholic schools
(Coleman, Hoffer, & Kilgore, 1982). Here, the “no causation
without manipulation” maxim reminds us that such studies
can be abused. Politicians might rely on them to push school
vouchers, but vouchers may induce only certain types of children to attend private schools or induce children to flock to
private schools in overwhelming numbers (Morgan, 2001).
Thus, the danger is that analysts may study the effect of a
variable that might bear an uncertain relationship to a contemplated policy intervention, whereas proper causal inference
counsels study of the effect of the proposed intervention itself
(Mealli & Rubin, 2003).
Immutable characteristics as causes are different. When
studying the causal effect of traits, particularly in law, we
ordinarily do not contemplate an intervention taking the form
of manipulating these attributes or even perceptions of them.
Rather, the goal is to decide whether to compensate victims
(as in employment discrimination) or whether to alter a governmental system in light of any discrimination found (such
as by suspending the death penalty). In short, we draw inferences as to causal effects of perceptions of traits to decide
whether to intervene in some remedial way, not to study
what would happen if we did intervene to alter these perceptions. Thus, an inability to manipulate actual immutable
characteristics may not be fatal.
This is not to say that identifying possible manipulations
has little value. To the contrary, such an exercise can illuminate several important aspects of an observational study.

CAUSAL EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED IMMUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS

We identify two such aspects. First, when a researcher
identifies what would be manipulated, the mechanisms by
which a person (below, we define this person, the decider)
perceives another’s race (or sex, or something else) are
thereby identified. If, as we believe, race is a social construct, then specifying the mechanisms by which the decider
perceives another’s race helps to define that construct for
the purposes of the study. Second, and relatedly, specifying
possible manipulations can assist in the process of identifying covariates needed to make an ignorability assumption
plausible.
We discuss ignorability in greater detail below, but to illustrate this point briefly, consider Bertrand & Mullainathan
(2004). This study sought to manipulate perceived race by
manipulating names on résumés (for example, “Lakisha” for
black, “Emily” for white). As Bertrand and Mullainathan
recognized, however, the hiring authorities in the firms they
studied might use names as a shorthand for other variables,
such as education, skills, or socioeconomic class. For this
reason, they sought to provide information on these variables in the résumés they sent. Thus, a focus on the variable
to be manipulated helped these analysts identify possible
confounders to the effect they wanted to measure. Identifying possible manipulations can serve the same role in an
observational study.
Note that the fact that the analyst might identify several
possible manipulations affecting perceived traits (for example, names, clothes, hair length, body shape) does not pose
definitional problems. Treatment variables need not be 0 or
1. And when proceeding Bayesianly, so that missing counterfactual values are conceptualized as random variables with a
distribution, an analyst could define a probability distribution
for the various manipulations. The distribution for each unit’s
missing counterfactual value would then be represented by
a stochastic mixture of the distributions induced by the various combinations of manipulations. Such a conceptualization
might pose inferential challenges and assumptions of some
strength may be required to proceed, but the basic framework
remains coherent.
The second primary objection to considering immutable
characteristics as treatments as opposed to attributes is that
at-conception assignment of treatment renders almost all relevant variables posttreatment. This is a serious problem, but
it does not prevent all progress. For example, many antidiscrimination mechanisms, particularly those implemented as
a result of litigation, turn on whether a particular person or
institutional actor, a decider, has behaved in a trait-neutral
manner. (We distinguish the decider, who controls the outcome of interest, from the decision maker in Rubin, 2008,
who may control treatment assignment.)
In the employment context, for example, a race discrimination lawsuit focuses on whether a firm has administered some
benefit, such as hiring without regard to race. Hypothetically
it might be that African Americans applying for jobs at a firm
suffer lower education achievement (as compared to Caucasians) because of past governmental school segregation and

777

that the employer, by hiring based on education achievement,
perpetuates the effects of this discrimination. Under the law,
however, as long as the employer makes decisions on the basis
of educational achievement alone (meaning without regard to
race), no liability attaches. In colloquial terms, the employer
is responsible only for avoiding its own discrimination, if any.
(We remind readers that here we discuss intentional discrimination, not what the law calls disparate impact, which focuses
on disparities on different groups’ outcomes allegedly caused
unintentionally.) Thus, in the employment example, we are
not simply allowed to condition on all variables whose values are determined prior to the moment of first interaction
between a set of job applicants and an employer; we are compelled to do that conditioning. Many relevant variables should
accordingly be thought of as pretreatment.
Much here depends on a willingness to exonerate the
decider from responsibility for prior events. In some situations, we do require the decider to respond to circumstances
arguably not of its own creation. For example, a statutorily imposed duty to “affirmatively further fair housing”
(42 U.S.C. §§ 1437c-1(d)(16), 5306(d)(7)(B)) may require
a local housing authority to decrease the racial identifiability
of neighborhoods, a circumstance that may be due in part
to nongovernmental decisions in the private housing market.
This situation differs from the one we study.
A. Primitives

We identify the primitives of causal inference: the units,
the treatments, the timing of treatment assignment, and the
outcome. Again, we use antidiscrimination (for example, in
jobs or capital trials) to illustrate concepts.
A unit is typically a person in some defined role, such
as an applicant for a job or a capital defendant. The treatment is the unit’s immutable characteristic as perceived by
the decider—an employer or the jury in a capital case (see
Pierce & Radelet, 2002, for analogous reasoning). The timing of treatment assignment is presumptively the moment
the decider first perceives the unit’s immutable characteristic. Conceptualizing treatment as occurring at the moment of
first perception captures the fact that variables whose values
are determined after that moment may be affected by the perception. For example, in an evaluation of an applicant’s job
interview, an employer may rate a unit perceived to be male
higher than an otherwise functionally identical unit perceived
to be female, so it makes sense to conceptualize the evaluation as an intermediate outcome. This critical issue of the
timing of treatment assignment has been unaddressed in statistical work regarding immutable characteristics (National
Research Council, 2004).
Two aspects of the primitives deserve further explanation.
First, to make it possible to imagine a unit’s counterfactual
outcomes and avoid the problem of a treatment administered
at birth, the decider must be a relatively discrete person or
institutional actor. For example, juries in capital cases play a

778

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

discrete role and interact with homicide victims over a defined
period of time, from jury selection to punishment verdict. It
may be possible, then, to imagine a capital jury’s perception
of a victim’s race being different from what it actually was,
that is, to visualize a counterfactual. In contrast, if the decider
is the set of all employers in the United States, as might be in
a nationwide study of the effect of perceived race on wages,
we have difficulty visualizing stable potential outcomes for
study units, a point to which we return in our discussion below
on the limits of our proposal.
Second, the emphasis on perceptions addresses problems
that previous researchers have not considered. One such problem addressed is the question of defining “true” race. Many
view race as a social construct that evolves over time, as
opposed to a biological concept (American Anthropological
Association, 1998; Lopez, 1996; Holland, 2003). For example, one court dispute involved the following question: “Is
a high caste Hindu of full Indian blood, born at Amrit Sar,
Punjab, India, a white person within the meaning of” U.S. naturalization law (United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204, 206,
1923)? This question’s combination of socioeconomic status, religion, ancestry, geography, and ethnicity suggests that
attempting to define “true” race in terms of biological characteristics could be futile. A focus on perceptions demonstrates
that such an attempt may also be unnecessary. Instead, for
causal inference to proceed, we must believe that U.S. society
has constructed classifications called, say, American Indian
or Alaska Native, Asian American, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and White
(U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1997), and that
these classifications exist in the mind of the decider. If so,
then biological definitions are irrelevant.
B. SUTVA

Previous work (Rubin, 1980b) has emphasized the criticality of SUTVA in defining causal effects in terms of an
N × 2 table of the units’ potential outcomes, where N is the
number of units. Both prongs of SUTVA—that for each unit
there is only one form of the treatment that the unit did not
receive (for example, only one kind of active pill for a unit
that receives placebo) and that the treatment one unit receives
does not affect a different unit’s potential outcomes—require
careful evaluation.
The assumption that there is only one form of each counterfactual treatment for each unit will ordinarily involve at
least three different aspects: one touching on unit characteristics, the second involving the extent of the interpersonal
interaction between the units and the decider, and the third
consisting of a concept we label “invariance.” With respect to
unit characteristics, the assumption means, for example, that
for a unit actually perceived as male, a potential employer
would not base hiring decisions on degree of “womanliness”
were that unit perceived to be female. Rather, for this unit who
is actually perceived male, we must imagine there could have

been in the employer’s mind a single essential, counterfactual
state of “woman.” With respect to the extent of interpersonal
interaction, in most settings, a researcher will be forced to
assume that the nature and extent of the relationship between
the units and the decider does not change the potential outcomes. For example, in a death penalty setting in which the
defendant’s race is at issue, a researcher will ordinarily have
to assume that it makes no difference whether a defendant
exercises a Fifth Amendment right not to testify, testifies for
a short period of time, or occupies the witness stand for a
week.
To understand what we call invariance, one might ask how
jurors discover a homicide victim’s race. A defense attorney
may exercise his client’s constitutional right to inform the
jury pool of the victim’s race and question potential jurors as
to their prejudices (Turner v. Murray, 476 U.S. 28, 37, 1986).
Alternatively, jurors may see pictures of a corpse, or they may
draw an inference about the victim’s race based on their perceptions of the races of the victim’s relatives who are called to
testify. The critical assumption here is that how the perception
is created does not matter, that is, the counterfactual potential
outcome is “stable,” invariant to the nature of the evidence
on which the decider’s perception is based. Something analogous to this assumption is implicit in any causal study. For
example, whether a potential vaccine shot is administered
in a unit’s right or left arm is ordinarily not recorded. On
the other hand, some differences in application (for example,
intermuscular versus subcutaneous administration of a drug)
may make a serious difference.
With respect to the second prong of SUTVA, noninterference, much depends here on the choice of decider and the
question to be studied. For example, in the death penalty
context, with the jury as the decider, the legal steps taken
to ensure jury neutrality and independence may render a
noninterference assumption plausible. In contrast, with the
prosecutor as the decider, the researcher must think carefully
about whether, for example, resource constraints allow the
prosecutor’s charging decisions to be independent from case
to case.
As is true with many assumptions, SUTVA could be
relaxed if the researcher has access to information beyond
that typically available. For example, if an accurate measurement of maleness were possible and recorded, where
accuracy here focuses on how well the measurement mimics
the governmental or socioeconomic actor’s perceptions, then
the treatment might be conceptualized as taking on multiple
values. In the ordinary study, however, the researcher will
have access only to “M” or “F.” Similarly, and as discussed
in section II, the invariance assumption may be relaxed if
the analyst proceeds in a Bayesian fashion and hypothesizes
a probability distribution over several possible hypothetical
manipulations. Proceeding in this manner in an observational
study would require substantial quantities of data regarding
which manipulations units actually received, however, and
may not be feasible in many observational contexts.

CAUSAL EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED IMMUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS
C. Further Assumptions for Implementation

The primitives, together with SUTVA, allow a researcher
to construct a well-defined framework for causal inference. In
practice, two additional assumptions, ignorability and accurate perceptions, will typically be necessary when applying
the framework to a data set.
Ignorability. In complicated transactions in which a unit
interacts with multiple parts of an overall socioeconomic or
governmental system, a researcher may have more than one
choice of decider to study. In such situations, the researcher
may have to balance the need to make an ignorability assumption plausible against a desire to detect the effect of perceived
immutable characteristics in all aspects of the system. By
focusing on a decider who perceives the unit’s immutable
characteristic “late” in the interaction, the researcher implicitly chooses a later timing of treatment assignment, rendering
more measured variables pretreatment and thus properly
characterized as covariates. That in turn can make an ignorability assumption more plausible. But by treating such
variables as covariates (and thus conditioning on them in the
analysis), the researcher forgoes the detection of any prior
discrimination that may have affected the values of these
covariates.
For example, in homicide investigations, at least six distinct actors play a role in the administration of a case from
discovery of a corpse’s race to a possible death sentence: the
police, the prosecutors, the witnesses, the defense team, the
judge, and the jury. Jurors perceive the victim’s race late in
the administration of the case, typically on or after the first
day of jury selection, allowing a researcher to consider as
covariates any variables whose values are determined before
jury selection begins. That makes an ignorability assumption
more plausible but also renders beyond the scope of the study
any discrimination prior to voir dire by the police, the prosecutor, the defense counsel, the witnesses, or the judge. In
contrast, a researcher studying prosecutors may have fewer
pretreatment variables, but if an ignorability assumption is
nevertheless plausible, discrimination (if any) in charging
decisions may be estimable.
Accurate perceptions. In a typical biomedical or social
science study, there are few conceptual issues associated
with recording the treatment to which a unit is assigned and
whether there is full compliance (for example, a unit takes
either an active ingredient or a placebo). In the context of perceived immutable characteristics, the treatment is in the mind
(perhaps the collective minds) of the decider and is thus technically unobserved. What is typically observed or recorded
is someone else’s perception of each unit’s immutable characteristic, often the unit’s self-report. Whatever the source of
the recorded value, its value must be “accurate,” for example, agree with the decider’s perception. This assumption
may often be plausible, but the recent increase in the numbers of persons with mixed race or ethnic self-identification,
however, may make this assumption questionable.

IV.

779

Where the Framework May Work

We believe that the set of circumstances in which inferences about the causal effect of perceived immutable characteristics can reasonably be attempted is nonempty. For
example, a researcher might be interested in the effect of
the victim’s race on the jury’s decision to impose death or
life imprisonment in cases in which no member of the victim’s family takes the witness stand (note that we focus on
the victim here, in contrast to our earlier focus on the defendant; as we will explain, capital punishment studies of race
typically concern the races of the victim and the defendant).
Under these circumstances, the jury’s perception of the victim’s race will ordinarily be based on evidence that one can
imagine a researcher manipulating, such as defense counsel’s statements to the jury pool during jury selection, the
juror’s observation of the victim’s physical characteristics as
depicted in photographs, or the victim’s name. Defense counsel could be asked to change a statement, photographs could
be altered, or the victim’s name (as reported to the jury) could
be changed. The fact that such hypothetical manipulations are
illegal does not distinguish this kind of observational study
from other observational studies in which a contemplated
intervention is unethical or prohibitively expensive. In any
event, as explained in section II, precisely specifying manipulations is less essential in the immutable characteristics
context because no one contemplates actually implementing them. Finally, legal safeguards such as sequestration may
ensure that juries do not interfere with one another, and variables with values set prior to jury selection are covariates,
thereby making SUTVA and ignorability more plausible.
Contrast this relatively straightforward situation with that
confronting a researcher who attempts to assess the effect of
the victim’s race on the entire capital criminal process. Here,
the decider is the entire criminal justice system, including
the police, who ordinarily perceive victim race on discovery
of a corpse. Many variables a researcher might record, from
the severity of the circumstances surrounding the crime to
some of the mitigating characteristics of the defendant’s life
(as discovered by investigations), are revealed posttreatment.
Although some underlying facts are pretreatment, the facts
as they are recorded in available sources (such as a police
report) are not. If police investigate majority-race homicides
with greater vigor than others, then the treatment may affect
what exists in the case file. This issue requires careful thought.
Thus, we have identified some circumstances under which
causal inference as to the effect of immutable characteristics
can proceed under plausible assumptions and some in which,
under the current state of our knowledge, such inference
might require implausible assumptions.
V.

Familiar Patterns

Clarifying these principles has several practical benefits. In
particular, problems arising in research regarding immutable
characteristics are structurally identical to issues confronted,

780

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

and solved, elsewhere. Numerous examples exist; we provide
one illustration from the death penalty context. In response
to the Supreme Court’s decision in Furman v. Georgia (408
U.S. 238, 1972), states adopted multistage trials for capital
prosecutions. For simplicity, we consider a two-phase process
used in some states, including Georgia. In the first, or guilt,
phase, the jury decides whether the defendant committed a
death-eligible crime. If it convicts on a death-eligible offense,
the same jury then decides, in a penalty phase that ordinarily includes additional evidence, whether the defendant
should be executed or sentenced to life in prison. The penalty
phase includes a variety of procedural safeguards designed
to reduce consideration of irrelevant factors, including race.
Under such a two-stage, single-jury system, courts and
researchers often ask whether race (of the defendant) plays a
role in the jury’s sentencing decision, an inquiry that directly
engages the procedural safeguards mentioned above. For
illustrative purposes, we assume for the moment that all
defendants are either white or black. Jurors typically perceive a defendant’s race during voir dire, and certainly by the
first day of the guilt trial. Thus, the treatment is administered
prior to the jury’s guilt verdict. But for the death penalty
to be an option at the sentencing phase, the jury must first
have convicted the defendant of a death-eligible offense (usually first-degree murder). Thus, an effect of defendant race
on sentencing is defined only for capital cases in which the
jury would have convicted the defendant of a death-eligible
offense under both treatments: perceived as white and perceived as black. A researcher who fails to isolate this set of
units for analysis could make one of many mistakes, among
them the attribution of an effect in fact occurring at the guilt
phase to an effect on sentencing. Structurally this problem
is identical to one labeled “censoring due to death” or “truncation due to death” in the biomedical context (Zhang &
Rubin, 2003; Rubin, 2006a). Note that here, alas, “death” in
the biomedical context is an acquittal (or a conviction of a
lesser offense) in the legal one. Greiner (2008) discusses further details. We return to this concept in our discussion of the
death penalty literature.
VI.

Capital Punishment Studies

To illustrate concepts, we had initially thought to reanalyze
data from one of the numerous recent (post-1990) studies
on race and capital punishment. After reviewing dozens of
papers in the area and paying particular attention to study
design (Rubin, 2008), we could find no preexisting capital
punishment data set that would allow causal inference by
the potential outcomes framework to proceed. As explained
below, we take heart in the fact that we do believe it possible
to gather a data set that would allow a successful study of, at
a minimum, jury decision making. Our reading of the literature suggests, however, that no such data-gathering effort has
been accomplished so far, and we thus review capital punishment study designs to illustrate our ideas. We also reanalyze
some data from the most famous empirical study in this area

(indeed, perhaps the most famous empirical study in the law):
the Baldus Charging and Sentencing Study of Georgia during the 1970s (Baldus, Woodworth, & Pulaski, 1990). But
because we are unable to articulate a well-defined causal
question answerable with the Baldus study data, we keep
our discussion brief.
We discuss each of two categories into which fall the majority of studies of trial-level adjudication of death sentences:
analyses that follow an approach we believe to be due to
Gross and Mauro (1984) and those that structurally resemble
the Baldus study. We include in the latter a discussion of the
results of our reanalysis of a portion of the Baldus study data.
A. SHR Studies

To our knowledge, Gross and Mauro (1984) pioneered the
practice of linking covariates from Supplementary Homicide
Reports (SHRs) with outcome data from other sources to
examine death penalty administration (for subsequent similar analyses, see Radelet & Pierce, 1991; Brock, Cohen, &
Sorensen, 2000; Williams & Holcomb, 2001; Lenza, Keys,
& Guess, 2005). Local law enforcement agencies file, with
the FBI, SHRs reporting the sex, age, and race of the both
victim and suspected killer (if information on the latter is
available); the date and place of the homicide; weapon used;
contemporaneous felonies; and a code for the victim-suspect
relationship. The Gross and Mauro (1984) template is to
match SHR cases to files from another data source (Gross and
Mauro used an NAACP database) containing information on
whether a defendant was sentenced to death. Because SHRs
do not include unique identifiers for the victim or a suspect
(the latter may not exist at the time the report is filed), the
linking process can be difficult and time-consuming. Once
linking is complete, cross-tabulation or model-based analysis can proceed using the variables contained in the SHR,
often with the four treatment groups described by the four
victim/defendant black/white combinations.
The decider implicitly chosen in these studies is difficult to
ascertain. To limit analysis to SHR data with reasonably complete information, Gross and Mauro (1984) use only those
SHR cases for which an age of the suspect is available, suggesting that for the remainder, there being no suspect, there
was “insufficient information . . . to form the basis for official
action” (p. 98). In other words, these cases never became part
of the criminal justice system. But entry into the criminal justice system is itself a decision made by deciders, particularly
the police and, to the extent involved in the investigation,
the prosecutor. Whether these deciders find and declare a
suspect could depend on the nature of their investigations,
which might depend on the perceived racial characteristics
of the victim and possible suspects.
Perhaps the SHR studies implicitly choose as the decider
the criminal justice homicide system from the prosecutor’s
office to penalty phase, thus internalizing an assumption that
any posttreatment bias in prosecutorial behavior did not affect
the covariate data in the SHRs. If one concedes that such
a focus leads to a well-defined study, a second difficulty

CAUSAL EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED IMMUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS

with SHR studies is whether the covariates in the SHRs are
rich enough to justify an ignorability assumption. To their
credit, Gross and Mauro (1984) discuss this issue explicitly;
we remain skeptical. The set of factors in the death penalty
statutes of the states under study includes more variables
than are coded in SHRs. For instance, there appear to be
no SHR variables addressing mitigating circumstances. Nor
did we encounter a study that attempted a sensitivity analysis (Cornfield et al., 1959) to check for the possible effect of
unmeasured covariates.
B. Analyses Resembling the Baldus Study

Perhaps the mostly highly praised empirical study in the
law (Committee on Racial and Gender Bias in the Justice System, 2001, collects favorable reviews) is the Baldus Charging
and Sentencing study. This study formed the backbone of
a claim, eventually rejected 5 to 4 in the Supreme Court
(McClesky v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 1987), that despite procedural reforms, race continued to play an unconstitutional role
in Georgia’s administration of the death penalty during the
late 1970s (Baldus, Woodworth, & Pulaski, 1990). The Baldus study’s data set consists of a stratified, multistage sample
of cases in which Georgia defendants had been convicted of
murder or voluntary manslaughter. Thus, the sample frame
did not include cases in which a defendant was indicted for
murder but the prosecution was dropped, the defendant was
acquitted, or the defendant was convicted of (or pled to) a
lesser offense other than voluntary manslaughter (such as
reckless homicide or involuntary manslaughter, or attempted
murder). Files for cases in the sample were reviewed and a
rich set of variables recorded, so for the moment, we assume
that an ignorability assumption might be made plausible for
a study of some decider.
According to the Baldus study authors, “The primary
objective of the [study’s] discrimination analyses presented to
the court was to estimate racial disparities in death-sentencing
rates among defendants indicted for murder. Such disparities
would reflect the combined effect of all decisions made from
the point of indictment through the jury’s decision.” (Baldus
et al., 1990, pp. 313–314). To assess this claim in light of the
causal principles discussed in sections I to IV, we begin by
identifying primitives, assuming for the moment that we are
interested in race-of-the-victim effects. The unit is a homicide
victim; the treatment is the victim’s race as perceived by the
deciders, meaning several actors within the criminal justice
system, including the prosecutor, judge, defense team, and
any jury; and the outcome is whether the defendant receives
the death penalty (we ignore for the moment the issue of
multidefendant and multivictim cases). What is the timing of
treatment assignment? If randomization of perceived victim
race were possible, when would it occur?
Suppose interest focuses on assessing prosecutorial behavior. Then, as discussed above, many variables a researcher
records from a homicide case file are determined after the
decider’s first perception of the victim’s or the defendant’s

781

race and are thus potentially influenced by the treatment,
requiring the researcher to pause before classifying such
variables as covariates. Particularly suspect are variables coding subjective judgments. Paternoster and Brame (2003), for
example, study prosecutor behavior with models that use as
a covariate whether a crime was “particularly gruesome” or
“unusually repulsive/horrific.” As Radelet and Pierce (1985)
note, so-called objective facts might be subject to manipulation based on the race of the victim or the accused. We do
not suggest that researchers should never condition on any
variable the value of which is determined after the moment
of first perception. We do suggest, however, that subjective
evaluations are particularly suspect and that all posttreatment
variables require careful evaluation and thought before they
are used as covariates.
In our view, the Baldus study did not recognize this point.
By way of illustration, one of the predictors conditioned
on in the Baldus study’s 39-variable core logistic regression, discussed further below, was whether a coperpetrator
to the homicide received a lesser sentence. But whether
a coperpetrator receives a lesser sentence may depend on
whether this individual’s testimony contributed to an outcome that the prosecution considers favorable, and thus this
variable is not just posttreatment but postoutcome, making
its characterization as a covariate questionable.
Identifying the primitives also highlights difficulties posed
by the fact that the Baldus data set was collected according to (and limited by) the offense for which the defendant
was convicted (see Berk, Asuza, & Hickman, 2005). If the
goal is to draw causal inferences about the criminal justice process from the beginning of prosecutorial involvement
to the penalty phase, then the sampling frame should have
included all cases potentially chargeable as homicides in
which a prosecutor became involved, that is, all units subject
to randomization in a hypothetical experiment. The practice
of selecting cases for study on the basis of some disposition,
often a disposition by the decider under study, is common
in this area (in addition to papers cited above and below, see
Radelet and Pierce, 1985; Klein & Rolph, 1991; Baldus et al.,
1998; Weisburd & Naus, 2001; Baime, 2001). The data set
in Paternoster and Brame (2003) (reanalyzed by Berk et al.,
2005) comes the closest we could find to avoiding this problem, but again, the data were limited to cases that a research
panel found to be “death eligible.”
We are not the first to make the particular point regarding
selection of data by final adjudication (see Pierce & Radelet,
2002, and Radelet & Pierce, 1991), but our approach demonstrates the inadequacy of the retorts most often made to this
point. Some defend selection by final adjudication as a way
to limit the study to cases that are “death eligible” (Unah &
Boger, 2001; Baldus et al., 2002; Weisburd & Naus, 2001),
but under the framework proposed here, death eligibility is
a choice made by a decider and thus is an outcome variable,
not a covariate to use for case selection. Others (Keil & Vito,
1995; Pierce & Radelet, 2002) may be attempting to avoid
the problem of selection on final adjudication by limiting

782

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

the question of interest to the decision of whether to impose
death conditional on a conviction for a death-eligible offense.
The apparent thought is that to proceed in this manner, the
researcher needs only cases in which the defendant has been
convicted of a death-eligible offense, all of which may be
(and are, in the Baldus study) included in the data set. This
attempt founders when identification of the decider and the
timing of treatment assignment uncover the “censoring due
to death” issue discussed in section IV. In short, absent strong
assumptions, one cannot coherently study the causal effect of
race on the sentencing phase of capital trials without including acquittals (and convictions for lesser included offenses)
in the data set and sampling frame.
A third retort is that tracking all homicides that reach,
say, the prosecutor’s office is not feasible (Pierce & Radelet,
2002). Assuming this to be the case, in our view, a less ambitious causal project might be wise. For example, with jury
as the decider, the first step would be to gather a data set
that includes acquittals and convictions for lesser offenses
(indeed, any case that reached voir dire) and excludes cases
that did not reach the jury selection stage with a death-eligible
charge intact, such as cases in which a pretrial plea bargain
was reached in which the maximum charge was manslaughter or in which the case was heard by a judge. (Note that the
Baldus study data set used for the 39-variable core regression includes cases decided by plea bargain.) Costs to this
approach are discussed above, but the study of jury behavior
is worthwhile.
A final retort we have heard informally is that few cases
that are indicted for murder or that reach a jury result in an
acquittal or a conviction for an offense lesser than voluntary
manslaughter. Empirically we are uncertain that this claim
is true; Bortner and Hall (2002), for example, report that for
first-degree murder cases in Arizona, approximately 20% of
indicted cases and 14% of cases reaching trial fall into this
category. But even if the claim were true, the issue is that a
small number of cases can have a substantial influence in a
well-designed observational study, depending on where those
cases fall in the covariate space. Because in observational
studies randomization cannot balance covariates, a researcher
must typically achieve balance by using some method (say,
propensity scores) to isolate subsets of data in the treated and
control groups with similar covariate distributions. Rarely do
these subsets span the covariate space; in other words, comparisons are possible only for certain subsets of cases in which
the covariate distributions of treated and control units overlap
and not all observations are members of these subsets (Fienberg & Haviland, 2003). Thus, a critical issue in selecting
cases on their final adjudication is not how many acquittals
(or convictions for lesser offenses) there are, but where they
fall in the covariate space. When some cases selected by outcome have zero probability of being sampled, a researcher
might have to rely on implausible assumptions regarding
either the covariate distributions of such cases or the correctness of a parametric model (or perhaps a classification

technique; see, Morton & Rolph, 2000) relating covariates to
outcome.
To illustrate concepts further, we obtained the Baldus study
data from ICPSR and replicated the point estimates of the
centerpiece model: the 39-variable weighted logistic regression that formed the primary basis for the empirical argument
in the McClesky case. A principal finding of the 39-variable
model was that the coefficient for race of the defendant had a
“perverse sign” (black defendants were less likely to receive
capital punishment), although this coefficient was not statistically significant. (On the basis of this finding, one of us was
instructed in a first-year criminal law class that the race of
the defendant played no role in the trial court administration
of the death penalty.)
After dividing the data into four treatment groups
(black/white for victim/defendant), we examined how we
might have proceeded had the 39 predictors been true covariates and had a well-defined causal question been answerable.
We observed the following results. First, no comparisons
involving white defendant, black victim cases were feasible, as there were too few such cases (27, with only two
death sentences). Thus, the two relevant studies were a study
of the effect of the victim’s race (white versus black, that
is, treated versus control) in black defendant cases, and a
study of the effect of the defendant’s race (black versus white,
treated versus control) in white victim cases. Second, 38 of
the Baldus study 39 predictors were binary, and the 39th
(number of prior felony sentences) was nearly so, with over
90% of units having values of 0 or 1. Third, there was a difference of several standard deviations (however estimated)
between the treated and control groups in the occurrence rates
of several covariates. For example, in the victim-race study,
the rates of homicides committed with armed robberies for
treated versus control were .31 to .07; the corresponding rates
for the involvement of a coperpetrator were .42 versus .12.
Regression adjustment in such situations can result in biased
estimates (Cochran, 1965; Cochran & Rubin, 1973). Meanwhile, other covariates had extremely low incidence rates (for
example, 2 out of 657 victims in the potential victim-race
study died by drowning).
These observations, and a desire to keep things simple, led
us to a categorical matching strategy (Rosenbaum & Rubin,
1985), and we focus here on the defendant race study (the one
using only white victim cases) as better illustrating concepts.
For each of the 139 treated (black defendant) cases, we identified its 39-variable predictor vector, then searched among the
382 control (white defendant) cases for one with an identical
39-variable vector. If we found one, we stopped the search
with respect to that treated unit. If we found no 39-variable
match, we searched for a 38-variable match, stopping if we
found one; if we found none, we looked for a 37-variable
match, and so on, until we had one or more best available
matches for each treated unit, where “best” was measured by
the number of identically valued variables. (If there was more
than one best available match, we averaged the corresponding outcomes.) The results appear in table 1. If we accept a

CAUSAL EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED IMMUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS

783

Table 1.—Categorical Matching Results for White Victim Cases, Treated (Black Defendant) versus Control (White Defendant)
Floor

# Trt. Units Mtchd.

% Trt. Dths.

% Cntrl. Dths.

#Unique Cntrl. Obs. Used

Max Cntrl. Wt.

Exact
38
37
36
35
34
33

6
29
58
93
123
137
139

0
17.2
24.1
30.1
34.1
35.0
36.0

0
10.3
15.9
25.1
27.3
28.9
29.2

31
61
90
120
137
146
146

.5
3
4.8
5.8
6.8
6.8
7

“Floor” reports the number (out of 39) predictors exactly matched and thus measures the quality of the match between the treated (black defendant) and control (white defendant) cases. “# Trt. Units Mtchd.” denotes
how many cases pass the bar set by “Floor” to be included in an analysis data set. The “% Trt. Dths” and “% Cntrl. Dths.” columns detail the percentage of death sentences for each type, where “treated” represents
black defendant cases and “control” represents white defendant cases. The “# Unique Cntrl. Obs. Used” column shows how many different white defendant cases were involved in the matching process. The “Max.
Cntrl. Wt.” column shows the largest number of times a single white defendant case was used in matching. The fractional values are due to our use of averages when more than one match of acceptable quality was
available to a particular treated (black defendant) unit.

match on 37 of 39 predictors as good enough (see the bold
and italicized cells in table 1), a chi-squared test for a difference in means demonstrates that the disparity between a
24.1% death rate (for defendants perceived black) and 15.9%
death rate (for defendants perceived white) is not statistically
significant, but it is also not perverse. The disparity is about
1.1 standard deviations, and in contrast to the findings in
Baldus, Woodworth, & Pulaski (1990), the difference is in
the expected direction: black defendants were more likely to
receive the death penalty than white defendants. This suggests that the perverse sign in Baldus et al.’s (1990) core
model logistic regression may have been due to the use of a
poorly fitting model, although all race-of-defendant results
may also have been due to random variation.
The results were sensitive to the hypothetical inclusion
in the sample frame of a small number of the “right” kind
of cases. For example, had the analysis data set included
three white defendant cases resulting in acquittals and having covariate vectors closely matching black defendant cases
with an outcome of death, the essentially null result for the
race of the defendant study would have p < .05. Again,
acquittals were not included in the Baldus, Woodworth, &
Pulaski (1990) data set.
We have kept our discussion brief because there is no causal
question under the potential outcomes framework answerable
with datasets such as are available from the Baldus study. Our
suggestion that we did not find an existing data set suited
to answer well-posed causal questions concerning the effect
of race in capital punishment under the potential outcomes
framework does not imply that we think the substantive conclusions reached in the studies are necessarily wrong or that
no inquiries can be answered by these data. Other questions,
including descriptive inquiries or questions focusing on associations or conditional associations, can be addressed, and
consumers of quantitative legal analysis might view such
answers as evidence regarding the role of race in the capital punishment system. We do not engage such issues. Our
focus here is on causal inference.
VII.

Limitations

A shift in focus from “true” immutable characteristics to
perceptions does not mean that any and all inquiries into the

effect of race, sex, and so on are well defined, even those
involving some aspect of randomization. Several limits are
particularly important. First, if treatments are perceptions,
then someone must be perceiving something. For this reason,
studies that attempt causal inference of the effect of characteristics of deciders themselves, as opposed to the deciders’
perceptions, are asking questions we find difficult to define,
at least at present, without further theoretical development of
a causal inference framework.
For example, several studies, reviewed in Boyd, Epstein,
and Martin (2010), appear to suggest that randomization of
judges to cases allows randomization-based inference with
respect to the causal effects of judges’ sex on judicial decisions. At least currently, we are less certain. The potential
outcomes in this literature appear to be case outcomes resulting from assigning a male or a female judge to a case. If
researchers are truly interested in the effect of sex on judging,
the potential outcomes should be case decisions (or votes) by
a particular judge had that judge been male versus female.
In other words, what these sex-in-judging studies may really
be studying is the effect of assigning a judge from group A,
all of whom happen to be female, versus assigning a judge
from group B, all of whom happen to be male. Such a design
might allow inferences as to the effect of the group A versus
B assignment, but is this a “sex” effect? True, groups A and
B differ in their sex distributions, but they likely also differ in many ways: distributions of judicial ideology, political
party, and number of years spent as prosecutors, for example.
Should researchers attempt to adjust for these differences by
matching or some other balancing technique? Presumptively
such balancing should be attempted only if these variables
are pretreatment: when was sex assigned to each judge? For a
male judge, would being born female have made it more likely
that this judge would have been of a different political party
or judicial ideology, or even been a judge at all? Meanwhile,
if such balancing is necessary, what was the role or relevance
of the randomization of judges to cases? Lacking a perception
to consider as a treatment, with the corresponding presumptive timing of treatment assignment, it does not appear that
this sort of study is asking a causal question with respect to
sex. It would appear, rather, that sex-in-judging studies following this design are describing differences without a causal
inquiry.

784

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

A second limit of our perspective is that the decider must be
relatively discrete and of manageable size. In this paper, we
have used firms or actors within the trial-level criminal justice system as deciders. The relatively discrete nature of these
entities has allowed both sharp articulation of a counterfactual outcome and clear identification of a timing of treatment
assignment. In contrast, for example, rigorous causal inference of the effect of race on wages in the U.S. economy
(Black et al., 2006) remains a poorly defined task without
implausible assumptions or further theoretical development
of a causal inference framework. The decider whose behavior is to be investigated appears to be the set of all employers
in the United States, a large, multifaceted, and diffuse group.
What does the counterfactual look like? Is SUTVA plausible? Is treatment assigned at the moment any potential U.S.
employer first perceives a unit’s race?

REFERENCES
American Anthropological Association, “Statement on ‘Race,”’ technical
report (1998).
Baime, David S., “Systemic Proportionality Review Project 2004–2005
Term,” New Jersey Supreme Court technical report (2001).
Baldus, David, George Woodworth, Catherine M. Grosso, and Aaron M.
Christ, “Arbitrariness and Discrimination in the Administration of
the Death Penalty: A Legal and Empirical Analysis of the Nebraska
Experience (1973–1999),” Nebraska Law Review 81 (2002), 486–
756.
Baldus, David C., George Woodworth, and Charles A. Pulaski Jr., Equal Justice and the Death Penalty Penalty: A Legal and Empirical Analysis
(Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1990).
Baldus, David C., George Woodworth, David Zuckerman, Neil Alan
Weiner, and Barbara Broffitt, “Racial Discrimination and the Death
Penalty in the Post-Furman Era: An Empirical and Legal Overview,
with Recent Findings from Philadelphia,” Cornell Law Review 83
(1998), 1638–1771.
Berk, Richard A., Regression Analysis: A Constructive Critique (Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 2004).
Berk, Richard, Azusa Li, and Laura J. Hickman, “Statistical Difficulties
in Determining the Role of Race in Capital Cases: A Re-Analysis
of Data from the State of Maryland,” Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 21 (2005), 365–390.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Are Emily and Greg More
Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor
Market Discrimination,” American Economic Review 94 (2004),
991–1013.
Black, Dan, Amelia Haviland, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor, “Why Do
Minority Men Earn Less? A Study of Wage Differentials among the
Highly Educated,” this review 88 (2006), 300–313.
Bortner, Peg, and Andy Hall, “Arizona First-Degree Murder Cases Summary of 1995–1999 Indictments: Data Set III Research Report
to Arizona Capital Case Commission,” Center for Urban Inquiry,
College of Public Programs, Arizona State University technical
report, http://www.azag.gov/CCC/Data%20Set%20II%20Report%
20June%202002.pdf (2002).
Boyd, Christina L., Lee Epstein, and Andrew Martin, “Untangling the
Causal Effects of Sex on Judging,” American Journal of Political
Science 54 (2010), 389–411.
Brock, Dean, Nigel Cohen, and Jonathan Sorensen, “Arbitrariness in the
Imposition of Death Sentences in Texas: An Analysis of Four Counties by Offense Seriousness, Race of Victim, and Race of Offender,”
American Journal of Criminal Law 43 (2000), 43–72.
Cochran, William G., “The Planning of Observational Studies of Human
Populations,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 128
(1965), 234–266.
Cochran, William G., and Donald B. Rubin, “Controlling Bias in Observational Studies: A Review,” Sankhya—A 35 (1973), 417–446.

Coleman, James S., Thomas Hoffer, and Sally Kilgore, High School
Achievement: Public, Catholic, and Private Schools Compared
(New York: Basic Books, 1982).
Committee on Racial and Gender Bias in the Justice System, “Final
Report,” Pennsylvania Supreme Court technical report, http://
www.courts.state.pa.us/index/supreme/biasreport.htm (2001).
Cornfield, J., W. Haenszel, E. Hammond, A. Lilienfeld, M. Shimkin, and
E. Wynder, “Smoking and Lung Cancer: Recent Evidence and a
Discussion of Some Questions,” Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 22 (1959), 173–203.
Cosmides, Leda, John Tooby, and Robert Kurzban, “Perceptions of Race,”
Trends in Cognitive Science 7 (2003), 173–179.
Fienberg, Stephen E., and Amelia M. Haviland, “Discussion of Statistics
and Causal Inference: A Review,” Test 12 (2003), 319–327.
Freedman, David, “Graphical Models for Causation and the Identification
Problem,” Evaluation Review 28 (2004), 267–293.
Gelman, Andrew, and Jennifer Hill, Data Analysis Using Regression and
Multilevel/Hierarchical Models (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2007).
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The
Impact of ‘Blind’ Auditions on Female Musicians,” American
Economic Review 90 (2000), 715–741.
Greiner, D. James, Contributions to Law and Empirical Methods, Ph.D.
thesis, Harvard University, 2007.
——— “Causal Inference in Civil Rights Litigation,” Harvard Law Review
122 (2008), 533–598.
Gross, Samuel R., and Robert Mauro, “Patterns of Death: An Analysis of
Racial Disparities in Criminal Sentencing,” Stanford Law Review 37
(1984), 27–153.
Heckman, James J., “Rejoinder: Response to Sobel,” Sociological Methodology 35 (2005), 135–162.
Holland, Paul W., “Statistics and Causal Inference,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 81 (1986a), 945–960.
——— “Statistics and Causal Inference: Rejoinder,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 81 (1986b), 968–970.
——— “Causation and Race,” Educational Testing Service research report
RR-03-03 (2003).
Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin, “Rubin Causal Model,” in Steven
N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume (Eds.), The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics, 2nd ed. (London: Palgrave Macmillan,
2006).
Kaufman, Jay S., “Epidemiologic Anaysis of Racial/Ethnic Disparities:
Some Fundamental Issues and a Cautionary Example,” Social
Science and Medicine 66 (2008), 1659–1699.
Keil, Thomas, and Gennaro F. Vito, “Race and the Death Penalty in
Kentucky Murder Trials, 1976–1991,” Advocate 17 (1995), 5–15.
Klein, Stephen P., and John Rolph, “Relationship of Offender and Victim
Race to Dealth Penalty Sentences in California,” Jurimetrics Journal
32 (1991), 33–48.
Lenza, Michael, David Keys, and Teresa Guess, “The Prevailing Injustices
in the Application of the Missouri Death Penalty (1978 to 1996),”
Social Justice 32 (2005), 151–166.
Lopez, Ian F. Haney, White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race (New
York: University Press, 1996).
Mealli, Fabrezia, and Donald B. Rubin, “Assumptions Allowing the Estimation of Direct Causal Effects: Discussion of ‘Healthy, Wealthy, and
Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths between Health and Socioeconomic Status’ by Adams et al.,” Journal of Econometrics 112 (2003),
79–87.
Morgan, S. I., “Counterfactuals, Causal Effect Heterogeneity, and the
Catholic School Effect on Learning,” Sociology of Education 74
(2001), 341–374.
Morton, Sally C., and John E. Rolph, Racial Bias in Death Sentencing:
Assessing the Statistical Evidence (New York: Springer, 2000).
National Research Council, Panel on Methods of Assessing Discrimination, Measuring Racial Discrimination (Washington, DC: National
Academies Press, 2004).
Neyman, Jerzey, “On the Application of Probability Theory to Agricultural
Experiments: Essay on Principles, Section 9,” Statistical Science 5
(1990 reprint and translation of 1923 original), 465.
Paternoster, Raymond, and Robert Brame, “An Empirical Analysis of Maryland’s Death Sentencing System with Respect to the Influence of
Race and Legal Jurisdiction,” Office of the Governor technical report,
http://www.newsdesk.umd.edu/pdf/finalrep.pdf (2003).

CAUSAL EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED IMMUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS
Pearl, Judea, Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Pierce, Glenn L., and Michael L. Radelet, “Race, Region, and Death Sentencing in Illinois, 1988–1997,” Oregon Law Review 81 (2002),
39–96.
Radelet, Michael, and Glenn L. Pierce, “Race and Prosecutorial Discretion
in Homicide Cases,” Law and Society Review 19 (1985), 587–622.
——— “Choosing Those Who Will Die: Race and the Death Penalty in
Florida,” Florida Law Review 43 (1991), 1–34.
Rosenbaum, Paul, and Donald B. Rubin, “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika
70 (1983), 41–55.
——— “The Bias Due to Incomplete Matching,” Biometrics 41 (1985),
103–116.
Rubin, Donald B., “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized
and Nonrandomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology
66 (1974), 688–701.
——— “Bayesian Inference for Causality: The Importance of Randomization” (pp. 233–239), in The Proceedings of the Social Science Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association (Alexandria,
VA: American Statistical Association, 1975).
——— “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of Randomization,” Annals of Statistics 6 (1978), 34–58.
——— “Bias Reduction Using Mahalanobis Metric Matching,” Biometrics
36 (1980a), 293–298.
——— “Discussion of Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data in
the Fisher Randomization Test by Basu,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 75 (1980b), 591–593.
——— “Causal Inference Through Potential Outcomes and Principal Stratification: Applications to Studies with ‘Censoring’ Due to Death,”
Statistical Science 21 (2006a), 299–321.

785

——— “Statistical Inference for Causal Effects, with Emphasis on Applications in Epidemiology and Medical Statistics,” in C. R. Rao and
Sandip Sinharay (Eds.), Handbook of Statistics 26: Psychometrics
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2006b).
——— “The Design versus the Analysis of Observational Studies for
Causal Effects: Parallels with the Design of Randomized Trials,”
Statistics in Medicine 26 (2007), 20–30.
——— “For Objective Causal Inference, Design Trumps Analysis,” Annals
of Applied Statistics 2 (2008), 808–840.
Sapiro, Virginia, “If US Senator Baker Were a Woman,” Political Psychology 3 (1981–1982), 61–83.
Unah, Isaac, and John C. Boger, “Race and the Death Penalty in
North Carolina: An Empirical Analysis: 1993–1997,” University
of North Carolina technical report, http://www.common-sense.org/
pdfs/NCDeathPenaltyReport2001.pdf (2001).
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, “Revisions to the Standard
for the Classification of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity”
(1997).
Weisburd, David, and Joseph Naus, “Report to Special Master David Baime
Re Systematic Proportionality Review,” New Jersey Administrative
Office of the Courts technical report (2001).
Williams, Marian R., and Jefferson E. Holcomb, “Racial Disparity and
Death Sentences in Ohio,” Journal of Criminal Justice 29 (2001),
207–218.
Winship, Christopher, and Michael Sobel, “The Estimation of Causal
Effects from Observational Data,” Annual Review of Sociology 25
(1999), 659–707.
Zhang, Junni L., and Donald B. Rubin, “Estimation of Causal Effects
via Principal Stratification When Some Outcomes are Truncated
by ‘Death,”’ Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 28
(2003), 353–368.

This article has been cited by:
1. Kosuke Imai, Dustin Tingley, Teppei Yamamoto. 2012. Experimental designs for identifying causal mechanisms. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) no-no. [CrossRef]

