Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Health Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/econbase

Bounding the effects of food insecurity on children’s health outcomes
Craig Gundersen a , Brent Kreider b,∗
a
b

University of Illinois, Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics, 324 Mumford Hall, 1301 W. Gregory Dr., Urbana, IL 61801, United States
Iowa State University, Department of Economics, 260 Heady Hall, Ames, IA 50010, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 13 December 2008
Received in revised form 10 June 2009
Accepted 16 June 2009
Available online 30 June 2009
JEL classiﬁcation:
I32
I12
Keywords:
Food insecurity
Health outcomes
Nonclassical measurement error
Nonparametric bounds
Average treatment effect

a b s t r a c t
Previous research has estimated that food insecure children are more likely to suffer from a wide array of
negative health outcomes than food secure children, leading many to claim that alleviating food insecurity would lead to better health outcomes. Identifying the causal impacts is problematic, however, given
endogenous selection into food security status and potential mismeasurement of true food security status. Using recently developed nonparametric bounding methods and data from the 2001–2006 National
Health and Nutritional Examination Survey (NHANES), we assess what can be identiﬁed about the effects
of food insecurity on child health outcomes in the presence of nonrandom selection and nonclassical measurement error. Under relatively weak monotonicity assumptions, we can identify that food security has a
statistically signiﬁcant positive impact on favorable general health and being a healthy weight. Our work
suggests that previous research has more likely underestimated than overestimated the causal impacts
of food insecurity on health.
© 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Positive associations between food insecurity and poor health
outcomes among children have been widely documented. Previous
research, spanning numerous academic studies, has found that children in households suffering from food insecurity are more likely to
have poor health (Cook et al., 2004; Weinreb et al., 2002; Dunifon
and Kowaleski-Jones, 2003), psychosocial problems (Kleinman et
al., 1998; Weinreb et al., 2002; Murphy et al., 1998), frequent stomachaches and headaches (Alaimo et al., 2001a), increased odds of
being hospitalized (Cook et al., 2004), greater propensities to have
seen a psychologist (Alaimo et al., 2001a), behavior problems (Slack
and Yoo, 2005; Whitaker et al., 2006), worse developmental outcomes (Jyoti et al., 2005; Rose-Jacobs et al., 2008), more chronic
illnesses (Weinreb et al., 2002), impaired functioning (Murphy et
al., 1998), impaired mental proﬁciency (Zaslow et al., 2009), and
higher levels of iron deﬁciency with anemia (Skalicky et al., 2006).
Perhaps paradoxically, food insecurity has also been associated
with higher propensities to be obese (Casey et al., 2001, 2006;
Dubois et al., 2006; Jyoti et al., 2005). These consistently negative
health ﬁndings emerge from a variety of data sources, employ a

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +515 294 6237.
E-mail addresses: cggunder@illinois.edu (C. Gundersen), bkreider@iastate.edu
(B. Kreider).
0167-6296/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.06.012

variety of statistical techniques, and appear to be robust to different
measures of food insecurity.
Based on this evidence, most authors conclude that efforts
to reduce food insecurity would lead to improvements in these
health outcomes. That is, if children in food insecure households
were to become food secure, they would be expected to achieve
health outcomes like those in observationally similar food secure
households. The central vehicle for helping alleviate food insecurity
among children is the Food Stamp Program, now called the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, p. 7). This program directly
augments a household’s resources available for purchasing food.
Prior research has suggested that SNAP leads to reductions in food
insecurity (e.g., Gundersen and Oliveira, 2001). Other policies, such
as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and educational programs
to assist families with food budgeting, may indirectly alleviate food
insecurity. More generally, any program that expands a low-income
household’s budget opportunities may lead to less food insecurity.
Irrespective of how policymakers pursue these improvements,
the general conclusion that efforts to reduce food insecurity would
lead to improvements in health outcomes is tenuous for two main
reasons. First, food insecurity is not randomly distributed among
the population. Even after controlling for characteristics that can
be observed in the data, there may remain important unobserved
factors that lead some children to be simultaneously at higher risk
of being food insecure and of being in poor health. Due to these

972

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

unobserved inﬂuences, a policy prescription that would alleviate
food insecurity among these children, even if worthwhile on other
grounds, might not lead to the predicted improvements in health
status.
Second, this literature presumes that food insecurity is accurately measured in household surveys. However, food insecurity
status may be mismeasured for a variety of reasons. Food insecurity is partially subjective, and there may be divergences between
how experts and various households interpret the survey questions (Gundersen and Ribar, 2005). Even if food insecurity were
objectively deﬁned, some parents might misreport being food
secure if they feel ashamed about heading a household in which
their children are not getting enough food to eat (Hamelin et al.,
2002). Alternatively, some households might misreport being food
insecure if they believe that reporting otherwise could jeopardize their eligibility for an assistance program – especially one
that provides food assistance, like SNAP. More generally, validation studies consistently reveal large degrees of response error in
popular surveys, even for variables thought to be relatively objective. In an important survey of the causes and consequences of
measurement error, Bound et al. (2001) conclude that response
error constitutes a serious problem for applied econometric work
across a wide range of topics. Moreover, they ﬁnd little reason
to believe that such errors tend to occur randomly. Instead, they
provide evidence that response errors tend to be correlated with
the underlying variable of interest and common socioeconomic
attributes. Consistent with this concern, Black et al. (2003) ﬁnd
that more than a third of respondents to the U.S. Census reporting
a professional degree have no such degree, with widely varying patterns of false positive and false negative reports across
demographic groups. A priori, there seems to be good reason to
consider the consequences of at least some small degree of misclassiﬁcation in food insecurity responses. Even small degrees of
classiﬁcation error can lead to large degrees of uncertainty for
inferences.1
In this paper, we reconsider what can be learned about the
effects of food security on child health outcomes when formally
accounting for the uncertainty created by unobserved counterfactuals and questions about the reliability of self-reported food
insecurity status. In the absence of strong (and untestable) assumptions on counterfactual outcomes and the reporting error process,
we cannot fully identify the impact of food security on health. Nevertheless, we can provide informative bounds on these impacts
using relatively weak nonparametric assumptions. Our analysis
applies and extends recent partial identiﬁcation bounding methods
that allow researchers to consider relatively weak nonparametric
assumptions (see, e.g., Manski, 1995; Pepper, 2000; Molinari, 2008,
forthcoming; Kreider and Pepper, 2007; Gundersen and Kreider,
2008; Kreider and Hill, 2009; Kreider et al., 2009). Using these
methods, coupled with data from the 2001–2006 National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), we assess the impact
of food insecurity on the health of children. We focus on two key
measures studied in previous work: a child’s general health status
and obesity status.
In the next section, we describe the central variables of interest in this paper – food insecurity, general health outcomes, and
obesity – followed by a description of the 2001–2006 NHANES.
In Section 3, we highlight the statistical identiﬁcation problems
created by selection issues and the potential unreliability of self-

1

In a regression setting, Kreider (forthcoming) ﬁnds that health insurance misclassiﬁcation rates of less than 1.3% are sufﬁcient to generate double-digit percentage
point ranges of uncertainty about the variable’s true marginal effect on the probability of using health services in a month.

reported food insecurity. We then show how the average treatment
effects of interest can be partially identiﬁed under various assumptions about the classiﬁcation error and selection processes. Section
4 presents our empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.
2. Concepts and data
2.1. Food insecurity
The extent of food insecurity in the United States has become
a well-publicized issue of concern to policymakers and program
administrators. In 2007, 11.1% of the U.S. population reported that
they suffered from food insecurity at some time during the previous
year (Nord et al., 2008). These households were uncertain of having, or unable to acquire, enough food for all their members because
they had insufﬁcient money or other resources. For about 4.1% of
the population, the degree of food insecurity was severe enough to
be recorded as very low food security. For households with children, the reported levels were higher: 15.8% and 4.7%, respectively.
As with other determinants of health status (e.g., having health
insurance), food insecurity status depends on the ability to afford
adequate amounts of food. In 2007, households with incomes below
185% of the poverty line had food insecurity rates over ﬁve times
higher than those with incomes below this threshold (Nord et al.,
2008; Table 2). Food insecurity is often related to nonpecuniary
factors as well, such as ﬁnancial management skills and nutrition
knowledge.
These ofﬁcial food insecurity rates, deﬁned over a 12-month
period, are calculated based on households’ responses to a series
of 18 questions posed in the Core Food Security Module (CFSM) for
families with children.2 Each question is designed to capture some
aspect of food insecurity and, for some questions, the frequency
with which it manifests itself. Examples include “I worried whether
our food would run out before we got money to buy more” (the least
severe outcome); “Did you or the other adults in your household
ever cut the size of your meals or skip meals because there wasn’t
enough money for food?” and “Did a child in the household ever
not eat for a full day because you couldn’t afford enough food?”
(the most severe outcome). A complete listing of the food insecurity questions is presented in Table 1.3 Following ofﬁcial deﬁnitions,
we classify a household with children as food insecure if it responds
afﬁrmatively to three or more questions in the CFSM; otherwise, it
classiﬁed as food secure. We also consider two other measures of
food insecurity, both detailed in the annual report on food insecurity in the United States (Nord et al., 2008). The ﬁrst classiﬁes
a household as food insecure with hunger (called “very low food
security” since 2006) if it responds afﬁrmatively to eight or more
of the questions. The second classiﬁes a household as marginally
food secure (or at risk of food insecurity) if it responds afﬁrmatively to at least one question. Our primary analysis employs the
standard food insecurity measure, but we consider the other two
thresholds in ancillary sensitivity analysis.
Central to this paper is the possibility that food insecurity is mismeasured in household surveys. Beyond the issues
raised above, Gundersen and Kreider (2008) provide evidence
that some households do not answer the CFSM questions consistently. They exploit the ordered nature of the food insecurity
questions and ﬁnd at least one inconsistency for 6.1% of the

2
For families without children and for one-person households, a subset of 10
questions are posed.
3
Responses to individual questions from the CFSM are suppressed for conﬁdentiality reasons in the NHANES. To see prevalence rates for a similar sample from the
Current Population Survey, see Gundersen and Kreider (2008).

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983
Table 1
Food insecurity questions in the Core Food Security Module.
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

“We worried whether our food would run out before we got money to
buy more.” Was that often, sometimes, or never true for you in the
last 12 months?
“The food that we bought just didn’t last and we didn’t have money to
get more.” Was that often, sometimes, or never true for you in the last
12 months?
“We couldn’t afford to eat balanced meals.” Was that often,
sometimes, or never true for you in the last 12 months?
“We relied on only a few kinds of low-cost food to feed our children
because we were running out of money to buy food.” Was that often,
sometimes, or never true for you in the last 12 months?
In the last 12 months, did you or other adults in the household ever cut
the size of your meals or skip meals because there wasn’t enough
money for food? (Yes /No)
“We couldn’t feed our children a balanced meal, because we couldn’t
afford that.” Was that often, sometimes, or never true for you in the
last 12 months?
In the last 12 months, did you ever eat less than you felt you should
because there wasn’t enough money for food? (Yes /No)
(If yes to Question 5) How often did this happen—almost every
month, some months but not every month, or in only 1 or 2 months?
“The children were not eating enough because we just couldn’t afford
enough food.” Was that often, sometimes, or never true for you in the
last 12 months?
In the last 12 months, were you ever hungry, but didn’t eat, because
you couldn’t afford enough food? (Yes /No)
In the last 12 months, did you lose weight because you didn’t have
enough money for food? (Yes /No)
In the last 12 months, did you ever cut the size of any of the children’s
meals because there wasn’t enough money for food? (Yes /No)
In the last 12 months did you or other adults in your household ever
not eat for a whole day because there wasn’t enough money for food?
(Yes /No)
In the last 12 months, were the children ever hungry but you just
couldn’t afford more food? (Yes /No)
(If yes to Question 13) How often did this happen—almost every
month, some months but not every month, or in only 1 or 2 months?
In the last 12 months, did any of the children ever skip a meal because
there wasn’t enough money for food? (Yes /No)
(If yes to Question 16) How often did this happen—almost every
month, some months but not every month, or in only 1 or 2 months?
In the last 12 months did any of the children ever not eat for a whole
day because there wasn’t enough money for food? (Yes /No)

Note: Responses in bold indicate an afﬁrmative response.

sample.4 Of course, the presence or absence of such inconsistencies cannot by itself determine the reliability of a household’s
aggregate food insecurity classiﬁcation. The presence of inconsistencies is not necessarily pivotal in determining the aggregate
classiﬁcation, and food insecurity can be misclassiﬁed even if the
household always reports consistently. Still, the signiﬁcant fraction
of inconsistencies provides one source of concern even prior to
considering the other aforementioned sources of potential measurement error.
2.2. Health outcomes
2.2.1. Childhood obesity
Approximately 17.1% of children in the U.S. between the ages
of 2 and 19 years are classiﬁed as obese, and another 16.5% are
overweight (Ogden et al., 2006). This prevalence has increased
threefold for children since 1970 (Wang and Zhang, 2006). Childhood obesity is thought to have negative physical, psychological,
and social consequences that have current and future implica-

4

For example, it would be expected that if a household responded afﬁrmatively
to “Child skipped meal due to lack of money” (item 16 in Table 1), the respondent
should also respond afﬁrmatively to “Child was hungry” (item 14) and to “Child not
eating enough” (item 9).

973

tions (e.g., Schwimmer et al., 2003; Carroll et al., 2007; Bender et
al., 2007; Nguyen et al., 2008) including reduced life expectancy
(Fontaine et al., 2003). As such, childhood obesity is of great interest
to policymakers.
The research on the relationship between food insecurity and
childhood obesity is mixed. Some have found a positive relationship (Dubois et al., 2006; Casey et al., 2001, 2006; Jyoti et al., 2005),
others have found no relationship (Alaimo et al., 2001b; Kaiser et
al., 2002; Martin and Ferris, 2007; Gundersen et al., 2008, 2009;
Bhargava et al., 2008), and others have found a negative relationship (Jimenez-Cruz et al., 2003; Rose and Bodor, 2006; Matheson
et al., 2002). This work has used a variety of data sets and methods.
In common to these papers is an assumption that reports of food
insecurity are classiﬁed accurately.
In this paper, we divide childhood weight status into two categories: (1) healthy weight and (2) overweight or obese.5 A child is
in the former category if his or her body mass index (BMI) (kg/m2 )
falls below the 85th percentile for age and gender and in the latter
category otherwise. These percentiles were established by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In ancillary analyses
we compare children who are obese (i.e., at or above the 95th percentile for BMI) with children who are overweight (but not obese)
or healthy weight.
2.2.2. General health
Our second health outcome is the general health of the child as
reported by the mother. This measure has been widely used as a
measure of child health (e.g., Case et al., 2002; Currie et al., 2007;
Currie and Stabile, 2003; Dowd, 2007; Murasko, 2008). Its use is
due, in part, to its correlation with other current and future health
outcomes (e.g., Case et al., 2002; Idler and Kasl, 1995; Idler and
Benysmini, 1997; Van Doorslaer and Gerdtham, 2003) including
some of the outcomes associated with food insecurity in the studies
noted above.
Based on parents’ responses, a child’s health using this measure
is categorized as excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor. In this
paper, we combine these general health categories into two categories: (1) excellent, very good, or good and (2) fair or poor. The
former we call “good health or better”. In the ancillary analyses,
we consider two different comparisons: excellent health compared
with the remaining categories and very good or excellent health
compared with the remaining categories.
2.3. Data
Our analysis uses data from the 2001–2006 NHANES. The
NHANES, conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics,
Centers for Disease Control (NCHS/CDC), is a program of studies
designed to assess the health and nutritional status of adults and
children in the U.S. through interviews and direct physical examinations. The survey now examines a nationally representative sample
of about 5000 persons each year, about half of whom are children.
The interview includes demographic, socioeconomic, dietary, and
health-related questions with components consisting of medical
and dental examinations, physiological measurements, and laboratory tests. Of particular relevance to this study, food insecurity is
calculated using the full set of questions in the CFSM as described

5
These are the designations provided by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Other terms for these categories are also used. A small number of children fall in the
underweight category with BMIs under the 5th percentile. We include them in the
healthy weight category, but our results are robust to whether they are included or
omitted from the analyses.

974

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

above,6 the child’s height and weight were measured with an
automated data-collection system by a trained technician in the
NHANES mobile examination center, and the child’s general health
is based on parental reports. Since food insecurity is rare among
households above 200% of the poverty line (Nord et al., 2008), we
limit our sample to households with incomes below this threshold.
Our sample contains 6056 children.

follows, we ﬁrst focus on the selection problem and then assess
the additional uncertainty created by potentially misclassiﬁed food
insecurity status.10

3. Identiﬁcation

P[H(1) = 1] = P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 1]P(FS ∗ = 1)

The central goal of this paper is to learn about the effect of food
security on (a) whether a child is in good or better health and (b)
whether a child is a healthy weight. Our treatment effects approach
considers the following thought experiment: To what extent might
expected health outcomes differ under a hypothetical treatment
that would make food insecure households food secure, without the
treatment affecting health status through other avenues? To this
end, we consider what can be known about the average treatment
effect (ATE),
ATE = P[H(FS ∗ = 1) = 1] − P[H(FS ∗ = 0) = 1],

(1)

under various assumptions, where H = 1 denotes a “good health”
outcome (e.g., the child is a healthy weight), FS ∗ = 1 if a child is
truly food secure,7 and FS ∗ = 0 if a child is truly food insecure. The
ATE reveals how the mean health outcome would differ if all lowincome children were food secure versus the mean outcome if all
low-income children were food insecure. Instead of observing FS ∗ ,
we observe a self-reported counterpart FS. A latent variable Z ∗ indicates whether a report is accurate: Z ∗ = 1 if FS ∗ = FS, with Z ∗ = 0
otherwise. In the absence of measurement error, FS ∗ can be replaced
with FS.8
Two forms of uncertainty arise when one assesses the ATE.
First, even if FS ∗ were observed for all children (i.e., there were
no conceptual or practical measurement issues), the outcome H(1)
is counterfactual for all children who were food insecure. Similarly, the outcome H(0) is counterfactual for all children who were
food secure. A statistical “selection” problem arises in that households become food secure or food insecure based in part on factors
unobserved to the researcher. Thus, for example, the mean health
outcomes of the currently food insecure, should they become food
secure, may not reﬂect the mean health outcomes of the currently
food secure. Second, true food insecurity status is not observed.
Even if all households respond accurately to survey questions, the
state of being food insecure is conceptually difﬁcult to measure.
We refer to this issue as the classiﬁcation error problem.9 Existing research on the effects of food security on health outcomes
has not addressed either of these identiﬁcation problems. In what

6
For conﬁdentiality reasons, however, the responses to individual questions are
suppressed in the NHANES data.
7
Food insecurity is deﬁned at the household level but, for simplicity of exposition,
we refer to a child being food secure or food insecure.
8
For ease of notation, we leave implicit any conditioning variables. We focus
on bounding treatment effects for the population of low-income households with
children as a whole, but it is straightforward to condition on any observed subpopulations of interest. One might loosely interpret H(FS) as a reduced form health
production function, though our approach does not require that we condition on
other attributes. Note that we are not estimating a regression, and there are no
regression orthogonality conditions to be satisﬁed.
9
Ofﬁcial statistics treat food insecurity as a binary event (e.g., Nord et al., 2008),
and virtually the entire literature has treated food insecurity in the manner (exceptions include Gundersen, 2008; Gundersen et al., 2003). As noted above, responses
to individual questions in the CFSM component of the NHANES are not available due
to conﬁdentiality concerns. For these reassons, and because our approach does not
lend itself to continuous treatments, we follow the vast majority of the food insecurity literature in treating food insecurity status as binary. We do, however, consider
alternative indicators of food insecurity as part of the sensitivity analysis.

3.1. Selection
To illustrate the selection problem, the ﬁrst component of Eq.
(1) can be written as

+ P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 0]P(FS ∗ = 0)
H(FS ∗

(2)
H(FS ∗

where we denote H(1) ≡
= 1) and H(0) ≡
= 0). For the
moment, assume that reports of food security are known to be accurate such that FS ∗ is observed. In this case, we can identify P(FS ∗ = 1)
and P(FS ∗ = 0), the fractions of children who are food secure and
food insecure, respectively, and P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 1], the probability of a favorable health outcome for food secure children. What
is not identiﬁed, however, is the counterfactual probability of a
favorable health outcome for food insecure children if they were
to become food secure, P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 0]. Absent other information, this value could lie anywhere between 0 and 1. Taking these
extreme cases, we can bound Eq. (2) as follows:
P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 1]P(FS ∗ = 1) ≤ P[H(1) = 1]
≤ P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 1]P(FS ∗ = 1) + P(FS ∗ = 0)
which reduces to
P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 1) ≤ P[H(1) = 1] ≤ P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 1) + P(FS ∗ = 0)
using P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1|FS ∗ = j] = P(H = j|FS ∗ = j) for j = 1, 0.
Each of the terms in these bounds is identiﬁed by the observed
data. We can analogously bound the quantity P[H(0) = 1]. Taking
the difference between the upper bound on P[H(1) = 1] and the
lower bound on P[H(0) = 1] obtains a sharp upper bound on ATE,
and analogously a sharp lower bound (Manski, 1995):
P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 1) − P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 0) − P(FS ∗ = 1)
≤ ATEManski ≤
P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 1) − P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 0) + P(FS ∗ = 0).

(3)

These bounds have a width of 1. To obtain these bounds, Manski
(1995) presumes that all variables are measured accurately. Conﬁdence intervals around ATE can be computed using methods
developed in Imbens and Manski (2004).
The bounds in Eq. (3) can be narrowed by making assumptions about the relationship between food security and health
outcomes. Under the strong assumption that selection is exogenous, for example, one can point-identify P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1] as equal
to P(H = 1|FS ∗ = j) for j = 1, 0 (see Eq. (2)) since, by exogeneity,
P[H(j) = 1|FS ∗ = 0] = P[H(j) = 1|FS ∗ = 1]. In this case, the average
treatment effect is identiﬁed as
ATEExogenous = P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 1) − P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0),

(4)

an observed quantity in the absence of measurement error since,
in that case, FS ∗ is observed.
In lieu of the exogeneity assumption, we consider the identifying power of various combinations of three types of relatively weak
monotonicity assumptions: monotone treatment response (MTR),
monotone treatment selection (MTS), and a monotone instrumental variable (MIV) restriction. We discuss each assumption in turn.

10
Using numerical search methods, our results can be generalized to cases where
H is also measured with error. In that case, our identiﬁed treatment effect bounds
would naturally become wider.

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

3.1.1. Monotone treatment response (MTR)
For the parts of our analysis that impose MTR, we assume that
becoming food secure would not lead to a reduction in a child’s
health status. Formally, we assume:
H(FSi∗ = 1) ≥ H(FSi∗ = 0) for all i
where i denotes the particular child. Under this assumption, it is
readily apparent that ATE is constrained to be nonnegative. Using
the law of total probability, it can also be shown that
P[H(0) = 1] ≤ P(H = 1) ≤ P[H(1) = 1].
For the general health outcome, the MTR assumption seems
relatively innocuous. At least in the short run, it is difﬁcult to imagine how becoming food secure would lead to worsened general
children’s health. With respect to the healthy weight outcome,
the MTR assumption is perhaps more tenuous because potential
increases in caloric intake could result in weight gains. Of course,
most increases in weight are not associated with obesity, and
the previous literature has found that food insecurity can lead to
higher probabilities of being overweight due to (1) overconsumption of cheaper, energy-dense foods (Dietz, 1995; Drewnowski and
Specter, 2004), (2) overeating when food is more plentiful (Scheier,
2005), (3) metabolic changes to ensure a more efﬁcient use of
energy (Alaimo et al., 2001b), and (4) parents protecting their children by giving them more food than needed when food is available
(McIntyre et al., 2003). In such instances, becoming food secure
decreases the likelihood of childhood obesity. Still, the potential
that becoming food secure could lead to increases in a child’s weight
leaves open the possibility that becoming food secure could lead to
weight problems in the short run and poorer general health outcomes in the long run. We impose the MTR assumption in deriving
our baseline results, but we make transparent how the results vary
when the assumption is discarded.
3.1.2. Monotone treatment selection (MTS)
The MTS assumption (Manski and Pepper, 2000) places structure on the selection mechanism through which children become
food secure or insecure. The literature on food security suggests that
food secure children are advantaged compared with food insecure
children across several economic and demographic characteristics
(Nord et al., 2008). These characteristics are associated with better
health outcomes with respect to both general health (Case et al.,
2002; Currie et al., 2007; Currie and Stabile, 2003; Dowd, 2007;
Murasko, 2008) and obesity (McKay et al., 2007; Forshee et al.,
2004; Van Hook and Stamper Balistreri, 2007). Suppose that children who are food secure under the status quo would be more
likely to be healthy, relative to their currently food insecure counterparts, conditional on the food security treatment. In that case,
the following MTS restrictions hold:
P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1|FS ∗ = 1] ≥ P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1|FS ∗ = 0] for j = 1, 0.

975

3.1.3. Monotone instrumental variables (MIV)
Finally, we consider the identifying power of an MIV assumption
ﬁrst analyzed by Manski and Pepper (2000). In our application, we
use the CPS-deﬁned “income-to-poverty” ratio as the monotone
instrument. This ratio measures a household’s income relative to
the ofﬁcial poverty line. Under the MIV assumption, we impose
the restriction that the probability of being healthy conditional
on food security status is weakly larger for children in higherincome households than in lower-income households. Letting v
represent the instrument, the MIV assumption implies the following inequalities:11
u1 ≤ u ≤ u2 ⇒ P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1|v = u1 ] ≤ P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1|v = u]
≤ P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1|v = u2 ] for

j = 1, 0.

(5)

As noted above, the literature on general health outcomes and
childhood obesity has demonstrated that people with higher
incomes tend to have better health outcomes. This mean monotonicity condition in Eq. (5) is weaker than the standard mean
independence instrumental variables (IV) assumption. Under mean
independence, the inequalities in Eq. (5) would be replaced with
equalities. It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd instruments for food insecurity
status that would satisfy mean independence, so we impose the
weaker MIV assumption that has less identifying power. Unlike
the standard IV assumption, the MIV assumption does not imply
any exclusion restriction; the mean health outcome is allowed to
vary (monotonically) with income though avenues distinct from
the impact of income on food security.
Across 12 ordered income categories (about 500 children per
group), the estimation procedure enforces a restriction that any
derived lower bound on P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1] (based on the particular set of other maintained assumptions) for a higher income group
must be no smaller than the lower bound derived for a lower income
group. Similarly, any derived upper bound on P[H(FS ∗ = j) = 1] for
a lower income group must be no larger than the upper bound
derived for a higher income group. Estimation details are provided
in Kreider and Pepper (2007) where they derive an estimator that
accounts for ﬁnite sample bias in Manski and Pepper’s (2000) standard MIV estimator.12 In other applications, the MIV assumption
has been effective in substantially narrowing the range of uncertainty about treatment effects (e.g., Kreider and Hill, 2009).
3.2. Bounding the ATE in the presence of classiﬁcation error
Given the selection problem, the average treatment effect cannot be identiﬁed based on the data alone. Even if the relevant
variables were known to be measured accurately, the presence of
unknown counterfactuals precludes point identiﬁcation; ATE can
only be bounded. When we also allow for classiﬁcation errors in
reported food security status, the bounds naturally widen. In this
section, we show how to bound ATE under various assumptions
about the selection process and about the nature and degree of
classiﬁcation error.

Under the MTS assumption, it can be shown that
P[H(1) = 1] ≤ P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 1)
and
P[H(0) = 1] ≥ P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0).
If FS ∗ is observed, then the right-hand-side quantities P(H = 1|FS ∗ =
1) and P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0) are known. If instead FS ∗ is measured
with error, then bounds on P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 1) and P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0),
derived below, serve as bounds on, respectively, P[H(1) = 1] and
P[H(0) = 1].

3.2.1. Exogenous selection
We begin with the special case of exogenous selection into food
security status using Eq. (4). In this case, we are abstracting away
from uncertainty about counterfactuals; all identiﬁcation uncertainty comes from uncertainty about the measurement of FS ∗ . To
assess the impact of classiﬁcation error in this exogenous selec-

Under the MTS assumption, the treatment FS ∗ is itself an MIV.
As discussed by Manski and Pepper (2000), their standard estimator is consistent
but biased in ﬁnite samples.
11

12

976

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

tion setting, we draw from the approach in Gundersen and Kreider
(2008). Let 1+ ≡ P(H = 1, FS = 1, Z ∗ = 0) and 1− ≡ P(H = 1, FS =
0, Z ∗ = 0) denote the unobserved fraction of false positive and
false negative food security reports, respectively, among healthy
children. Let 0+ ≡ P(H = 0, FS = 1, Z ∗ = 0) and 0− ≡ P(H = 0, FS =
0, Z ∗ = 0) denote the fraction of false positive and false negative
food security reports, respectively, among non-healthy children.
Before considering any structure on the pattern of false positives and false negatives, we begin by assessing identiﬁcation
given a limit on the potential degree of misclassiﬁcation. Following
Horowitz and Manski (1995) and much of the subsequent literature,
we can study how identiﬁcation of unknown parameters varies
with the conﬁdence in the data. Consider an upper bound, q, on
the fraction of inaccurate food security classiﬁcations:
(i) P(Z ∗ = 0) ≡ 1+ + 0+ + 1− + 0− ≤ q.

(6)

This assumption incorporates a researcher’s beliefs about the
potential degree of data corruption. If q equals 0 (as is implicitly
assumed in all previous work on relationships between food security and health outcomes), then P(H = 1|FS ∗ ) is point-identiﬁed
because all food security reports are assumed to be accurate. At the
opposite extreme, a researcher unwilling to place any limit on the
potential degree of reporting error can set q equal to 1. In that case,
there is no hope of learning anything about P(H = 1|FS ∗ ) without
constraining the pattern of reporting errors. In any event, the sensitivity of inferences on P(H = 1|FS ∗ ) can be examined by varying
the value of q between 0 and 1. To illustrate identiﬁcation decay in
the presence of even small amounts of food security classiﬁcation
errors, our empirical analysis focuses on values of q between 0 and
0.05.
Regardless of any subsequent assumptions on the pattern of
reporting errors, the following constraints must hold:
(ii) 0 ≤ 1+ ≤ P(H = 1, FS = 1) ≡ p11
(iii) 0 ≤ 0+ ≤ P(H = 0, FS = 1) ≡ p01
(iv) 0 ≤ 1− ≤ P(H = 1, FS = 0) ≡ p10
(v) 0 ≤ 0− ≤ P(H = 0, FS = 0) ≡ p00 .
For example, the fraction of children experiencing negative health
outcomes in households falsely classiﬁed as being food secure obviously cannot exceed the fraction of children experiencing negative
health outcomes in households classiﬁed as being food secure.
Worst-case bounds on P(H = 1|FS ∗ ) can be obtained by ﬁnding
the extrema subject to the restrictions on 1+ , 0+ , 1− , and 0− provided in constraints (i)–(v). Let p ≡ P(FS = 1) be the reported food
security rate. In the absence of further assumptions, we obtain
the following sharp “corrupt sampling” (arbitrary error) bounds
on P(H = 1|FS ∗ ) derived by Kreider and Pepper (2007) in another
context:13
“Corrupt Sampling Bounds With Exogenous Selection”
(Kreider and Pepper, 2007, Prop. 1): Let P(Z ∗ = 0) ≤ q. Under exogenous selection, the fraction of positive health outcomes if all children
were to become food secure is bounded sharply as follows:
p11 − ˛+
p11 + ˛−
≤ P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 1) ≤
p − 2˛+ + q
p + 2˛− − q

13
Corrupt sampling refers to an environment where nothing is known about the
pattern of reporting errors.

using the values



˛+ =


˛− =

min{q, p11 }
max{0, q − p00 }

if p11 − p01 − q ≤ 0
otherwise

min{q, p10 }
max{0, q − p01 }

if p11 − p01 + q ≤ 0
otherwise.

Analogous bounds for the fraction of positive health outcomes
among food insecure children, P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0), are obtained by
replacing FS = 1 with FS = 0 and vice versa in each of the relevant
quantities. Sharp bounds on ATEExogenous are obtained by subtracting worst-case lower bounds from worst-case upper bounds on
P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 1) and P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0). Intuitively, the bounds converge to P(H = 1|FS = 1) as q goes to 0. Increasing q may widen the
bounds over some ranges of q but not others, and the rate of identiﬁcation decay can be highly nonlinear as q increases (especially
for larger values of q).
These corrupt sampling bounds can be narrowed, sometimes
dramatically, by imposing restrictions on the patterns of false positives and false negatives. We focus on an “orthogonal errors”
assumption that food security classiﬁcation errors occur independently of whether the household is truly food secure:14
P(FS ∗ = 1|Z ∗ = 1) = P(FS ∗ = 1|Z ∗ = 0).

(7)

In this case, the false positive and false negative classiﬁcation errors
must satisfy the constraint:
(vi) [1 − p − (1− + 0− )][(1+ + 0+ ) + (1− + 0− )]
= (1+ + 0+ )[1 − (1+ + 0+ ) − (1− + 0− )].
As revealed in our empirical results, this orthogonality assumption
has substantial identifying power. While this restriction cannot be
tested, it is obviously weaker than the standard assumption in previous work that food insecurity status is reported without error. We
cannot obtain closed-form bounds on ATE for this case, but we can
obtain sharp bounds by imposing this constraint using numerical
methods.15
3.2.2. Endogenous selection
When selection into food security status is endogenous,
the average treatment effect is no longer constrained by the
bounds in Eq. (4). To derive corrupt sampling bounds for
this case in the presence of classiﬁcation error, we begin by
writing
P[H(1) = 1] = P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 1]P(FS ∗ = 1)
+ P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 0]P(FS ∗ = 0) = P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 1)P(FS ∗ = 1)
+ P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 0]P(FS ∗ = 0) = P(H = 1, FS ∗ = 1)
+ P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 0]P(FS ∗ = 0).
We must set P[H(1) = 1|FS ∗ = 0] equal to 0 for the lower bound and
equal to 1 for the upper bound since this quantity is unrestricted.

14
Many studies have assumed that classiﬁcation errors arise independently of the
variable’s true value (see Molinari, 2008 for a discussion). Bollinger (1996), for example, discusses the possibility that a worker’s true union status has no inﬂuence on
whether union status is misreported in the data. Kreider and Pepper (2008) consider
the identifying assumption that, among certain types of respondents, misreported
disability status does not depend on true disability status. Gundersen and Kreider
(2008) and Kreider et al. (2009) consider a “no false positives” identifying assumption that respondents may fail to report receiving food stamps but not falsely claim
to receive food stamps.
15
Our Gauss program is available upon request.

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

Then we can write
P(H = 1, FS =

1) + 1−

− 1+

≤ P[H(1) = 1] ≤ P(H = 1, FS = 1)

+ P(FS = 0) + 0+ − 0− .
To obtain the worst-case lower bound, we must set 1− = 0 and
1+ = min{q, P(H = 1, FS = 1)}. For the worst-case upper bound, we
must set 0− = 0 and 0+ = min{q, P(H = 0, FS = 1)}. Thus, the corrupt sampling bounds are given by
“Corrupt Sampling Bounds With Endogenous Selection”: Let
P(Z ∗ = 0) ≤ q. Under arbitrary endogenous selection, the fraction of
positive health outcomes if all children were to become food secure is
bounded sharply as follows:
H(1)

LBcorrupt = P(H = 1, FS = 1) − min{q, P(H = 1, FS = 1)}
≤ P[H(1) = 1] ≤
H(1)

UBcorrupt = P(H = 1, FS = 1) + P(FS = 0) + min{q, P(H = 0, FS = 1)}.
Analogous bounds on P[H(0) = 1] are obtained by replacing
FS = 1 with FS = 0 and vice versa in each of the relevant quantities. Sharp bounds on ATE are obtained by subtracting worst-case
lower bounds from worst-case upper bounds on P[H(1) = 1] and
P[H(0) = 1]. Intuitively, the ATE bounds with endogenous selection
converge to the Manski (1995) bounds in Eq. (3) as q goes to 0.
As above, these bounds can be narrowed by imposing restrictions on the patterns of food insecurity classiﬁcation errors. Using
numerical methods to impose constraint (vi), our empirical analysis
considers the case where classiﬁcation errors arise independently
of true food insecurity status (i.e., under the assumption of orthogonal errors). In presenting our results, we consider the additional
identifying power of the MTR, MTS, and MIV assumptions.
4. Empirical results
We now turn to our empirical results. Figs. 1–4, and their accompanying tables, illustrate what can be known about the average
treatment effect as a function of q under various assumptions about
the selection process and food security misclassiﬁcation patterns.
One set of results focuses on the impact of food security on general
health status. A parallel set of results focus on the impact of food
security on being a healthy weight.
We begin with the case of exogenous selection into food security status. Fig. 1A displays sharp bounds on ATEExogenous = P(H =
1|FS ∗ = 1) − P(H = 1|FS ∗ = 0) for the “good health or better” versus “fair or poor health” outcome over the range q = 0 to q = 0.05.
When q = 0.05, for example, up to 5% of the FS ∗ classiﬁcations
may be in error. When q = 0, ATEExogenous is point-identiﬁed as
0.953 − 0.892 = 0.061. That is, children in food secure households
are 6.1 percentage points more likely to be in good health compared with children in food insecure households. As shown in the
accompanying table, the 90% conﬁdence interval is [0.044, 0.079].
Since this conﬁdence interval does not include 0, we can identify the
sign of ATEExogenous as positive even after accounting for sampling
variability.
As revealed in the ﬁgure, however, even tiny degrees of uncertainty about true food insecurity status are sufﬁcient to overturn
the conclusion that food secure children are more likely to be in
good health. Under corrupt sampling, we can no longer identify the
sign of ATEExogenous (even prior to considering standard errors) if
we allow for the possibility that even 1.5% of the food insecurity
status classiﬁcations are in error. Imposing the orthogonal errors
assumption makes little difference. Under this restriction on the
pattern of errors, we still cannot identify whether food secure children are more likely to be healthy if up to 2.1% of the classiﬁcations
may be in error.

977

Starting at q = 0, a 1 percentage point increase in the degree
of uncertainty about the reliability of food insecurity classiﬁcations (increase in q), given orthogonal errors, is associated with
an additional 8.2 percentage point increase in uncertainty about
ATEExogenous . By the time we allow for the possibility of a 5% error
rate, we ﬁnd that children in food secure households may be up to
14.2 percentage points more likely to be in good health than their
food insecure counterparts under orthogonal errors – or they may
be up to 9.0 percentage points less likely to be in good health. This
23.2 percentage point range of uncertainty about the ATE is striking, especially since it abstracts away from additional uncertainty
associated with sampling variability, the selection mechanism, and
the possibility that health status might also be mismeasured. Very
small degrees of food security classiﬁcation errors can result in
severe degrees of uncertainty about the relationships between food
security and health.
Fig. 1B presents parallel results for the healthy weight outcome.
In the absence of classiﬁcation error (q = 0), we can identify that
food secure children are 4.6 percentage points more likely to have
a healthy weight (0.683 − 0.636 = 0.046). Critical values for q are
similar to those identiﬁed for the general health case above. If food
insecurity status might be arbitrarily misclassiﬁed up to 1.5% of
the time, then we can no longer identify whether food secure or
food insecure children are more likely to have a healthy weight.
Under the orthogonal errors assumptions, the critical value rises
only slightly to 1.9%.
Fig. 2A and B make clear how little can be known about the
average treatment effect when we impose no restrictions on the
nature of the selection process into food secure status. Even if we
presume perfectly accurate measurement of the data, we are confronted with a 100 percentage point range of uncertainty about the
average treatment effect (see Eq. (3) and discussion): ATE could
lie anywhere within [−0.329, 0.671] for the general health outcome and anywhere within [−0.424, 0.576] for the healthy weight
outcome.
Similarly, little can be known about the fraction of households
that would be healthy if all children became food secure, P[H(1) =
1], without making assumptions about the food security selection
process. Ignoring measurement error, 93% of the households in our
sample are classiﬁed as being in good or better health. If all children were to become food secure, the proportion of children in
good or better health could lie anywhere between 63.4% and 96.9%
(not shown). Likewise, little can be known about the fraction of
respondents that would have a healthy weight. In the data, 67% are
classiﬁed as being a healthy weight; if all children were to become
food secure, this outcome could range from 45.5% to 78.9%.
To make tighter inferences about P[H(1) = 1] and ATE, stronger
assumptions must be imposed. As seen in Fig. 3, the bounds on
ATE narrow dramatically after imposing the MTR and MTS monotonicity assumptions. When q = 0, the fraction of households that
would be healthy if all children were food secure, P[H(1) = 1], is
conﬁned to lie within the narrow range [0.933, 0.953] (not shown).
As seen in Fig. 3A, the range of ATE narrows to [0, 0.061]. For healthy
weight, P[H(1) = 1] is conﬁned to the narrow range [0.667, 0.683]
(not shown). As seen in Fig. 3B, ATE lies within the range [0, 0.046].
That is, children would be up to 6.1 percentage points more likely
to be healthy if all children were food secure versus if all children
were food insecure. Similarly, children would be up to 4.6 percentage points more likely to have a healthy weight if children were to
become food secure.
After allowing for possible classiﬁcation errors in food security
status, the potential for strong positive effects of food security on
health rises substantially. For example, Fig. 3A shows that the upper
bound on ATE for good health rises to 14.2 percentage points under
orthogonal errors, and 19.4 points under arbitrary errors, if even 5%

978

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

Fig. 1. (A) Sharp bounds on the difference in the probability of being in good or better health between food secure and food insecure children under exogenous selection. (B)
Sharp bounds on the difference in the probability of BMI ≤ 85th percentile between food secure and food insecure children under exogenous selection.

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

979

Fig. 2. Sharp bounds on ATE = P[H(1) = 1] − P[H(0) = 1] with no monotonicity assumptions.

of the food insecurity classiﬁcations may be inaccurate. Thus, our
results reveal that efforts to limit uncertainty about the reliability of
food insecurity data can have important consequences for limiting
uncertainty about the effects of food security on health status. If
we impose the MTS assumption but discard the MTR assumption,
the upper bounds in Fig. 3 would remain the same but the lower
bounds would fall to the Fig. 2 lower bounds.
We now turn to the case when we combine the MTR–MTS
assumptions with the MIV assumption. In this case, the average
treatment effects are identiﬁed to be strictly positive. Recall that
the MIV assumption imposes the restriction that, on average, health
status does not decline with a family’s income-to-poverty ratio.

The “no MIV LB” and “no MIV UB” bounds depicted in Fig. 4 reproduce the Fig. 3 bounds. The MIV bounds tighten these inferences.
As seen in Fig. 4A, the joint MTR–MTS–MIV assumption allows us
to nearly point-identify the general health ATE if the food security classiﬁcations are known to be fully reliable. Speciﬁcally, ATE is
bounded to lie in the narrow range [0.014, 0.035] when q = 0. For
the healthy weight outcome, ATE is bounded to lie within the range
[0.007, 0.039]. In both cases, policies that promote food security are
identiﬁed to promote better health outcomes. When q increases
from 0 to 0.05, the upper bound on the average treatment effect for
good general health status rises from 0.035 to 0.109, while the lower
bound remains constant at 0.014. For healthy weight, the upper

Fig. 3. Sharp bounds on ATE = P[H(1) = 1] − P[H(0) = 1] with MTR and MTS assumptions.

980

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

Fig. 4. Sharp Bounds on ATE = P[H(1) = 1] − P[H(0) = 1] with MTR and MTS: comparison of no MIV and MIV cases under orthogonal errors.

bound rises from 0.039 to 0.174 while the lower bound remains
constant at 0.007. If we drop the MTR assumption for the general
health outcome, the lower bound ranges from −0.307 when q = 0 to
−0.358 when q = 0.05 (not shown). If we drop this assumption for
the healthy weight outcome, the lower bound ranges from −0.424
when q = 0 to −0.474 when q = 0.05.
In Tables A.1 and A.2, we assess the robustness of our primary
results to alternative constructions of the health indicators (different rows) and food insecurity indicators (different columns).
For the general health outcome, we replace the threshold “at least
good health” with the alternatives “at least very good health” and
“excellent health.” For the healthy weight outcome, we replace the
threshold “BMI ≤ 85th percentile” (representing not overweight or
obese) with the alternative “BMI ≤ 95th percentile” (not obese).
Recall from Section 2.1 that the standard food insecurity indicator
classiﬁes a household as food insecure if the household answers
afﬁrmatively to three or more questions in the 18-item CFSM. In
the sensitivity analysis, we consider an indicator of “food insecure
or at risk” (also termed “marginal food insecurity” in the literature) and an indicator of “food insecurity with hunger” (since 2006
called “very low food security”). A household with children is classiﬁed as food insecure or at risk if it answers afﬁrmatively to at least
one of the 18 questions. A household is classiﬁed as food insecure
with hunger if it responds afﬁrmatively to eight or more of the 18
questions.
As seen in Table A.1, the main conclusions from Fig. 1 are robust
to these alternative measures. While the estimated values of  are
naturally sensitive to the particular deﬁnitions (baseline cases in
bold), the table reveals that identiﬁcation of this parameter decays
rapidly with q in all cases. Critical values for q in which the sign of
 is just identiﬁed vary between 0.003 and 0.075. Thus, under any
set of deﬁnitions, the sign of  cannot be identiﬁed if more than
7.5% of the food insecurity classiﬁcations may be in error.
Table A.2 displays our sensitivity analysis for the average treatment effect bounds illustrated in Fig. 4. The main conclusion from
this table is that we can continue to identify ATE as strictly positive
in most cases under the joint MTR–MTS–MIV assumption, at least
for small degrees of food insecurity classiﬁcation error. As an exception, we cannot identify ATE as strictly positive if the threshold is
excellent general health. Also, we cannot identify a strictly positive

effect for the baseline healthy weight outcome (BMI ≤ 85th percentile) under the food insecurity with hunger criterion. As before,
the lower bound impacts of food security on health outcomes are
relatively uninformative if the MTR assumption is discarded.
Our results in Figs. 3 and 4 demonstrate that uncertainty about
the reliability of FS ∗ does not necessarily translate into symmetric
uncertainty for policymakers regarding the efﬁcacy of improving food insecurity in promoting good health. Once we allow for
the possibility of data errors in FS ∗ (q > 0), we ﬁnd that the true
impacts of food security on health outcomes may be considerably
larger than would be estimated under the assumption of perfectly
accurate data (q = 0). Conversely, our results suggest that there is
relatively little risk that researchers have overestimated the magnitudes of these health impacts.
This conclusion for policymakers is qualitatively consistent with
the well-known attenuation bias result associated with classical
measurement error in an explanatory variable.16 In the context of
the classical model, random mismeasurement of FS ∗ in a regression setting would result in a downward-biased estimate of food
security on health due to negative correlation between reported
food security status and the stochastic regression disturbance. In
that case, the attenuation result would be driven by the strong
“nondifferential errors” independence assumption embedded in
the classical model that, conditional on FS ∗ , any measurement error
in FS must be independent of health status, other conditioning variables of interest, and the regression disturbance. We obtain a similar
attenuation result without imposing any of the parametric or distributional assumptions associated with the classical measurement
error regression model.
5. Conclusion
Policymakers have long been concerned about the well-being
of millions of children who grow up in food insecure households.
Much of this concern arises from well-documented links between
food insecurity and unfavorable health outcomes. In response,
numerous efforts (e.g., SNAP) have been pursued with the goal of

16

See, e.g., Wooldridge (2002, chapter 4).

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

ensuring that all children live in food secure homes. While there is
little debate that food secure children tend to have more favorable
health outcomes, identifying the causal impacts of food security on
health is problematic. Food insecurity is obviously not randomly
assigned. Many household characteristics, including those unobserved in the data, might lead some children to be simultaneously
at higher risk of being food insecure and of having poor health outcomes. Moreover, the potential for conceptual and practical errors
in the measurement of food insecurity exacerbates a policymaker’s
uncertainty about the efﬁcacy of food assistance programs in fostering better health outcomes. Previous analyses of the role of food
security for healthy outcomes have not addressed either of these
important identiﬁcation issues.
In this paper, we used nonparametric bounding methods to
reconsider what can be identiﬁed about causal effects of food security on children’s health outcomes. We formally accounted for the
uncertainty created by unobserved counterfactuals and potentially
mismeasured food insecurity status. Even under the strong and
implausible assumption of exogenous selection, we illustrate how
the presence of very small degrees of classiﬁcation error in food
security status can be sufﬁcient to lose identiﬁcation of the sign
of the average treatment effect. Under relatively weak monotonicity assumptions, however, we can identify that food security has a
statistically signiﬁcant positive impact on children’s general health
status, even with endogenous food security status.
We show that uncertainty about the reliability of the food
security data need not translate into symmetric uncertainty for
policymakers regarding the impact of food security on health outcomes. Under the monotonicity assumptions, we ﬁnd that allowing
for the possibility of food security classiﬁcation errors opens up
the possibility that the true impacts of food security on health
outcomes may be considerably larger than estimated under the
standard assumption of no errors. Conversely, there appears to be
relatively little risk that researchers have systematically overestimated the magnitudes of these health impacts. A qualitatively
similar attenuation bias result could be derived using classical measurement error assumptions. Unlike the classical model, however,
our methods do not presume that measurement error is exogenous. Instead, we allow for the possibility that classiﬁcation errors
are endogenously related to the true value of the potentially mismeasured food security variable or the health outcomes.
We suggest several areas for future research. First, the bounds in
this analysis might be narrowed by imposing additional identifying assumptions. As one possibility, researchers might be willing to
assume that at least some subset of the food security classiﬁcations
are known to be accurate. For example, one might be willing to “ver-

981

ify” that a household is truly food secure if it responds negatively to
all 18 of the relevant food security questions in the CFSM. Similarly, a
household might be veriﬁed to be food insecure if responding afﬁrmatively to a large number of questions. Second, future research
on the mechanisms through which food security affects health outcomes is warranted. Of particular import is disentangling the shortand long-run effects of becoming food secure. Third, our analysis
has presumed that health outcomes are accurately reported. While
the height and weight status of children in the NHANES are objectively measured by trained personnel, the general health outcome
relies on more subjective interpretations. The bounds in this analysis naturally widen if we allow for the possibility that both food
security and health status are misclassiﬁed.
Finally, we emphasize that our analysis is intended to isolate the
impact of food security on health, not the impact of program participation on health. Therefore, our analysis cannot directly identify
the health consequences of programs designed to alleviate food
insecurity, like SNAP. Not everyone who enrolls in a program like
SNAP becomes food secure, and any program that provides transfers
(or manipulates prices) has the potential to impact health status
through avenues distinct from the program’s effect on food security. SNAP beneﬁts, for example, free up some of a household’s
resources that might have been spent on food. If some of these freed
resources are spent on medical services, then the program can also
impact health status through the consumption of more health care
– thus reinforcing the positive impact on health. Further research
is required on a program-by-program basis to identify the health
consequences of particular policies.
Acknowledgements
This research is funded through a RIDGE grant from the Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture and the
Harris School, University of Chicago. The views expressed in this
paper are solely those of the authors. Previous versions of this
paper were presented at the ERS/Harris School RIDGE Workshop,
the RIDGE Conference, the Annual Meetings of the Association
for Public Policy Analysis and Management, and the University of Illinois. The authors thank attendees at those venues,
especially Tom DeLeire, and an anonymous referee for very
helpful comments. Brandie Ward provided excellent research assistance.
Appendix A.
See Tables A.1 and A.2.

Table A.1
Sensitivity analysis for Fig. 1.
Value of  at q = 0 and critical value qc for when the sign of  is identiﬁed a
Food insecure b
q=0
At least good health
At least very good health
Excellent health

0.061
0.152
0.131

BMI ≤ 85th percentile
BMI ≤ 95th percentile

0.046
0.047

e

At risk of being food insecure c

Food insecure with hunger d

qcarbitrary , qcorthogonal

q=0

qcarbitrary , qcorthogonal

q=0

qcarbitrary , qcorthogonal

0.014, 0.021
0.049, 0.059
0.051, 0.062

0.053
0.151
0.150

0.014, 0.025
0.054, 0.073
0.065, 0.075

0.067
0.108
0.116

0.007, 0.008
0.016, 0.017
0.021, 0.027

0.015, 0.018
0.012, 0.017

0.041
0.040

0.015, 0.020
0.012, 0.019

0.019
0.040

0.003, 0.003
0.005, 0.005

a

The sign of  is not identiﬁed under arbitrary errors when q > qcarbitrary and is not identiﬁed when q > qcorthogonal under orthogonal errors.

b

At least three afﬁrmative responses to questions in the 18-item Core Food Security Module (CFSM).
At least one afﬁrmative response to questions in the 18-item CFSM.
Baseline estimates presented in bold.
At least eight afﬁrmative responses to questions in the 18-item CFSM.

c
d
e

982

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983

Table A.2
Sensitivity analysis for Fig. 4.
Sharp bounds on ATE = P[H(1) = 1] − P[H(0) = 1] with MTS and MIV under orthogonal errors
Food insecure a

Food insecure or at risk b

Food insecure with hunger c

With MTR

No MTR

With MTR

No MTR

With MTR

No MTR

[0.014, 0.035] d
[0.014, 0.050]
[0.014, 0.109]

[−0.307, 0.035]
[−0.317, 0.050]
[−0.358, 0.109]

[0.014, 0.023]
[0.014, 0.039]
[0.014, 0.113]

[−0.429, 0.023]
[−0.439, 0.039]
[−0.479, 0.113]

[0.014, 0.035]
[0.014, 0.049]
[0.014, 0.050]

[−0.145, 0.035]
[−0.156, 0.049]
[−0.163, 0.050]

At least very good health
q=0
[0.023, 0.090]
q = 0.01
[0.023, 0.109]
q = 0.05
[0.023, 0.185]

[−0.361, 0.090]
[−0.370, 0.109]
[−0.409, 0.185]

[0.023, 0.109]
[0.023, 0.126]
[0.023, 0.188]

[−0.405, 0.109]
[−0.415, 0.126]
[−0.453, 0.188]

[0.023, 0.101]
[0.023, 0.129]
[0.023, 0.231]

[−0.325, 0.101]
[−0.335, 0.129]
[−0.374, 0.231]

Excellent health
q=0
q = 0.01
q = 0.05

[−0.455, 0.094]
[−0.465, 0.116]
[−0.505, 0.196]

[0.000, 0.105]
[0.000, 0.121]
[0.000, 0.182]

[−0.429, 0.105]
[−0.439, 0.121]
[−0.480, 0.182]

[0.000, 0.083]
[0.000, 0.136]
[0.000, 0.415]

[−0.515, 0.083]
[−0.525, 0.136]
[−0.565, 0.415]

BMI ≤ 85th percentile
q=0
[0.007, 0.039]
q = 0.01
[0.007, 0.059]
q = 0.05
[0.007, 0.123]

[−0.424, 0.039]
[−0.434, 0.059]
[−0.474, 0.123]

[0.007, 0.032]
[0.007, 0.051]
[0.007, 0.123]

[−0.469, 0.032]
[−0.479, 0.051]
[−0.519, 0.123]

[0.000, 0.015]
[0.000, 0.054]
[0.000, 0.177]

[−0.368, 0.015]
[−0.378, 0.054]
[−0.413, 0.177]

BMI ≤ 95th percentile
q=0
[0.011, 0.035]
q = 0.01
[0.011, 0.052]
q = 0.05
[0.011, 0.123]

[−0.372, 0.035]
[−0.382, 0.052]
[−0.422, 0.123]

[0.011, 0.027]
[0.011, 0.046]
[0.011, 0.112]

[−0.459, 0.027]
[−0.469, 0.046]
[−0.509, 0.112]

[0.011, 0.019]
[0.011, 0.042]
[0.011, 0.180]

[−0.245, 0.019]
[−0.255, 0.042]
[−0.272, 0.180]

At least good health
q=0
q = 0.01
q = 0.05

a
b
c
d

[0.000, 0.094]
[0.000, 0.116]
[0.000, 0.196]

At least three afﬁrmative responses to questions in the 18-item Core Food Security Module (CFSM).
At least one afﬁrmative response to questions in the 18-item CFSM.
At least eight afﬁrmative responses to questions in the 18-item CFSM.
Baseline estimates presented in bold.

References
Alaimo, K., Olson, C., Frongillo, E., Briefel, R., 2001a. Food insufﬁciency, family income,
and health in US preschool and school-aged children. American Journal of Public
Health 91, 781–786.
Alaimo, K., Olson, C., Frongillo, E., 2001b. Low family income and food insufﬁciency in
relation to overweight in US children: is there a paradox? Archives of Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine 155, 1161–1167.
Bender, B., Fuhlbrigge, A., Walders, N., Zhang, L., 2007. Overweight, race, and psychological distress in the children asthma management program. Pediatrics 120
(4), 805–813.
Bhargava, A., Jolliffe, D., Howard, L., 2008. Socioeconomic, behavioral and environmental factors predicted body weights and household food insecurity scores in
the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study: kindergarten. British Journal of Nutrition 100 (2), 438–444.
Black, D., Sanders, S., Taylor, L., 2003. Measurement of higher education in the Census
and CPS. Journal of the American Statistical Association 98 (463), 545–554.
Bollinger, C., 1996. Bounding mean regressions when a binary variable is mismeasured. Journal of Econometrics 73 (2), 387–399.
Bound, J., Brown, C., Mathiowetz, N., 2001. Measurement error in survey data. In:
Leamer, E.E., Heckman, J.J. (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 5, pp. 3705–
3843.
Carroll, C., Stoltz, P., Raykov, N., Smith, S., Zucker, A., 2007. Children overweight
increases hospital admission rates for asthma. Pediatrics 120 (4), 734–740.
Case, A., Lubotsky, D., Paxson, C., 2002. Economic status and health in childhood:
The origins of the gradient. American Economic Review 92 (5), 1308–1334.
Casey, P., Simpson, P., Gossett, J., Bogle, M., Champagne, C., Connell, C., Harsha,
D., McCabe-Sellers, B., Robbins, J., et al., 2006. The association of child and
household food insecurity with childhood overweight status. Pediatrics 118,
1406–1413.
Casey, P., Szeto, K., Lensing, S., Bogle, M., Weber, J., 2001. Children in food-insufﬁcient,
low-income families: prevalence, health and nutrition status. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 155, 508–514.
Cook, J., Frank, D., Berkowitz, C., Black, M., Casey, P., Cutts, D., Meyers, A., Zaldivar, N.,
Skalicky, A., Lenenson, S., Heeren, T., Nord, M., 2004. Food insecurity is associated
with adverse health outcomes among human infants and toddlers. Journal of
Nutrition 134, 1348–1432.
Currie, A., Shields, M., Wheatley, S., 2007. The child health/family income gradient:
evidence from England. Journal of Health Economics 26, 213–232.
Currie, J., Stabile, M., 2003. Socioeconomic status and child health: why is the relationship stronger for older children? American Economic Review 93, 1813–1823.
Dietz, W., 1995. Does hunger cause obesity? Pediatrics 95, 766–767.
Dowd, J., 2007. Early childhood origins of the income/health gradient: the role of
maternal health behaviors. Social Science and Medicine 65, 1202–1213.

Drewnowski, A., Specter, S., 2004. Poverty and obesity: the role of energy density
and energy costs. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 79, 6–16.
Dubois, L., Farmer, A., Girard, M., Porcherie, M., 2006. Family food insufﬁciency is
related to overweight among preschoolers. Social Science and Medicine 63,
1503–1516.
Dunifon, R., Kowaleski-Jones, L., 2003. The inﬂuences of participation in the National
School Lunch Program and food insecurity on child well-being. Social Service
Review 77, 72–92.
Fontaine, K., Redden, D., Wang, C., Westfall, A., Allison, D., 2003. Years of life lost due
to obesity. Journal of the American Medical Association 289 (2), 187–193.
Forshee, R., Anderson, P., Storey, M., 2004. The role of beverage consumption, physical
activity, sedentary behavior, and demographics on body mass index of adolescents. International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 55 (6), 463–478.
Gundersen, C., 2008. Measuring the extent, depth, and severity of food insecurity:
an application to American Indians in the United States. Journal of Population
Economics 21 (1), 191–215.
Gundersen, C., Kreider, B., 2008. Food stamps and food insecurity: what can be
learned in the presence of nonclassical measurement error. Journal of Human
Resources 43 (2), 352–382.
Gundersen, C., Oliveira, V., 2001. The Food Stamp Program and food insufﬁciency.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 84 (3), 875–887.
Gundersen, C., Ribar, D., 2005. Food insecurity and insufﬁciency at low levels of food
expenditures. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Working Paper No. 1594.
Gundersen, C., Garasky, S., Lohman, B., 2009. Food insecurity is not associated with
childhood obesity as assessed using multiple measures of obesity. Journal of
Nutrition 139, 1173–1178.
Gundersen, C., Weinreb, L., Wehler, C., Hosmer, D., 2003. Homelessness and food
insecurity. Journal of Housing Economics 12 (3), 250–272.
Gundersen, C., Lohman, B., Eisenmann, J., Garasky, S., Stewart, S., 2008. Child-speciﬁc
food insecurity and overweight are not associated in a sample of 10- to 15-yearold low-income youth. Journal of Nutrition 138 (2), 371–378.
Hamelin, A., Beaudry, M., Habicht, J., 2002. Characterization of household food insecurity in Quebec: food and feelings. Social Science and Medicine 54, 119–132.
Horowitz, J., Manski, C., 1995. Identiﬁcation and robustness with contaminated and
corrupted data. Econometrica 63 (2), 281–302.
Idler, E., Benysmini, Y., 1997. Self-reported health and mortality: a review of twentyseven community studies. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38, 21–37.
Idler, E., Kasl, S., 1995. Self-ratings of health: do they also predict change in functional
ability? Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 50 (6), S344–S353.
Imbens, G., Manski, C., 2004. Conﬁdence intervals for partially identiﬁed parameters.
Econometrica 72, 1845–1857.
Jimenez-Cruz, A., Bacardi-Gascon, M., Spindler, A., 2003. Obesity and hunger among
Mexican-Indian migrant children on the US-Mexico border. International Journal of Obesity 27, 740–747.

C. Gundersen, B. Kreider / Journal of Health Economics 28 (2009) 971–983
Jyoti, D., Frongillo, E., Jones, S., 2005. Food insecurity affects school children’s academic performance, weight gain, and social skills. Journal of Nutrition. 135,
2831–2839.
Kaiser, L., Melgar-Quiñonez, H., Lamp, C., Johns, M., Sutherlin, J., Harwood, J.,
2002. Food security and nutritional outcomes of preschool-age MexicanAmerican children. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 102, 924–
929.
Kleinman, R., Murphy, J., Little, M., Pagano, M., Wehler, C., Regal, K., Jellinek, M., 1998.
Hunger in children in the United States: potential behavioral and emotional
correlates. Pediatrics 101, e3.
Kreider, B., forthcoming. Regression coefﬁcient identiﬁcation decay in the presence
of classiﬁcation errors. Review of Economics and Statistics.
Kreider, B., Hill, S., 2009. Partially identifying treatment effects with an application
to covering the uninsured. Journal of Human Resources 44 (2), 409–449.
Kreider, B., Pepper, J., 2007. Disability and employment: reevaluating the evidence
in light of reporting errors. Journal of the American Statistical Association 102
(478), 432–441.
Kreider, B., Pepper, J., 2008. Inferring disability status from corrupt data. Journal of
Applied Econometrics 23 (3), 329–349.
Kreider, B., Pepper, J., Gundersen, C., Jolliffe, D., 2009. Identifying the effects of food
stamps on children’s health outcomes when participation is endogenous and
misreported. Working Paper.
Manski, C., 1995. Identiﬁcation Problems in the Social Sciences. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Manski, C., Pepper, J., 2000. Monotone instrumental variables: with an application
to the returns to schooling. Econometrica 68 (4), 997–1010.
Martin, K., Ferris, A., 2007. Food insecurity and gender are risk factors for obesity.
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 39, 31–36.
Matheson, D., Varady, J., Varady, A., Killen, J., 2002. Household food security and
nutritional status of Hispanic children in the ﬁfth grade. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 76, 210–217.
McKay, C., Bell-Ellison, B., Wallace, K., Ferron, J., 2007. A multilevel study of
the associations between economic and social context, stage of adolescence,
and physical activity and body mass index. Pediatrics 119 (Suppl. 1), S84–
S91.
McIntyre, L., Glanville, N., Raine, K., Dayle, J., Anderson, B., Battaglia, N., 2003. Do
low-income lone mothers compromise their nutrition to feed their children?
Canadian Medical Association Journal 168, 686–691.
Molinari, F., forthcoming. Missing treatments. Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics.
Molinari, F., 2008. Partial identiﬁcation of probability distributions with misclassiﬁed data. Journal of Econometrics 144, 81–117.
Murasko, J., 2008. An evaluation of the age–proﬁle in the relationship between
household income and the health of children in the United States. Journal of
Health Economics 27, 1489–1502.
Murphy, J., Wehler, C., Pagano, M., Little, M., Kleinman, R., Jellinek, M., 1998. Relationship between hunger and psychosocial functioning in low-income American
children. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
37 (2), 163–170.

983

Nguyen, S., McCulloch, C., Brakeman, P., Portale, A., Hsu, C., 2008. Being overweight
modiﬁes the association between cardiovascular risk factors and microalbuminuria in adolescents. Pediatrics 121 (1), 37–45.
Nord, M., Andrews, M., Carlson, S., 2008. Household food security in the United
States, 2007, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. Economic
Research Report No. 66.
Ogden, C., Carroll, M., Curtin, L., McDowell, M., Tabak, C., Flegal, K., 2006. Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the United States 1999–2004. Journal of the
American Medical Association 295 (13), 1549–1555.
Pepper, J., 2000. The intergenerational transmission of welfare receipt: A nonparametric bounds analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (3), 472–488.
Rose, D., Bodor, J., 2006. Household food insecurity and overweight status in young
school children: results from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study. Pediatrics
117, 464–473.
Rose-Jacobs, R., Black, M., Casey, P., Cook, J., Cutts, D., Chilton, M., et al., 2008. Household food insecurity: Associations with at-risk infant and toddler development.
Pediatrics 121 (1), 65–72.
Scheier, L., 2005. What is the hunger-obesity paradox? Journal of the American
Dietetic Association 105, 883–886.
Schwimmer, J., Burwinkle, T., Varni, J., 2003. Health-related quality of life of severely
obese children and adolescents. Journal of the American Medical Association 289
(14), 1813–1819.
Skalicky, A., Meyers, A., Adams, W., Yang, Z., Cook, J., Frank, D., 2006. Child food
insecurity and iron deﬁciency anemia in low-income infants and toddlers in the
United States. Maternal and Child Health Journal 10 (2), 177–185.
Slack, K., Yoo, J., 2005. Food hardship and child behavior problems among lowincome children. Social Service Review 79 (3), 511–536.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, 1999. Annual Historical
Review: Fiscal Year 1997.
Van Doorslaer, E., Gerdtham, U., 2003. Does inequality in self-assessed health predict
inequality in survival by income? Evidence from Swedish data. Social Science
and Medicine 57, 1621–1629.
Van Hook, J., Stamper Balistreri, K., 2007. Immigrant generation, socioeconomic status, and economic development of countries of origin: a longitudinal study of
body mass index among children. Social Science and Medicine 65, 976–989.
Wang, Y., Zhang, Q., 2006. Are American children and adolescents of low socioeconomic status at increased risk of obesity? Changes in the association between
overweight and family income between 1971 and and 2000. American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition 84 (4), 707–716.
Weinreb, L., Wehler, C., Perloff, J., Scott, R., Hosmer, D., Sagor, L., Gundersen, C., 2002.
Hunger: its impact on children’s health and mental health. Pediatrics 110, e41.
Whitaker, R., Phillips, S., Orzol, S., 2006. Food insecurity and the risks of depression
and anxiety in mothers and behavior problems in their preschool-aged children.
Pediatrics 118 (3), e859–e868.
Wooldridge, J., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Zaslow, M., Bronte-Tinkew, J., Capps, R., Horowitz, A., Moore, K., Weinstein, D., 2009.
Food security during infancy: implications for attachment and mental proﬁciency in toddlerhood. Maternal and Child Health Journal 13 (1), 66–80.

