The Prognostic Analogue of the Propensity Score
Ben B. Hansen
Statistics Department, University of Michigan
439 West Hall, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, U.S.A.
ben.b.hansen@umich.edu
March 2007

Abstract
The propensity score collapses the covariates of an observational study into a
single measure summarizing their joint association with treatment conditions;
prognostic scores summarize covariates’ association with potential responses.
As with propensity scores, stratification on prognostic scores brings to uncontrolled studies a concrete and desirable form of balance, a balance that is more
familiar as an objective of experimental control. Like propensity scores, prognostic scores can reduce the dimension of the covariate; yet causal inferences
conditional on them are as valid as are inferences conditional only on the unreduced covariate. As a method of adjustment unto itself, prognostic scoring
has limitations not shared with propensity scoring, but it holds promise as a
complement to the propensity score, particularly in certain designs for which
unassisted propensity adjustment is difficult or infeasible.
Key words: covariate balance, matched sampling, matching, observational
study, quasi-experiment, regression discontinuity, subclassification

1

1 Introduction
Following Neyman (1923) and Rubin (1977), let us construe an intervention’s effect in
terms of potential outcomes, as the differences between subjects’ potential responses
to treatment, yt , and control, yc . The basic challenge for measurement of effects is that
at most one of these two outcomes is observed, according as the subject did (z = 1) or
did not (z = 0) in actuality receive the treatment. This difficulty is most conclusively
surmounted when the potential outcomes arise through stable, repeatable processes
with known chance properties, as in laboratories with highly controlled experimental
conditions, and when treatment conditions are decided by a stable, repeatable process
with known chance properties, as in field or clinical studies with random assignment
to treatment (Holland 1986).
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) showed that modelling the observed pattern of
treatment (z) as a function of covariates (x = (x01 , . . . x0k )0 ) collapses those covariates into a scalar, the propensity score, upon which it is beneficial to condition.
The demonstration requires no ostensible assignment mechanism to exist outside the
statistical model, and suggests that even when treatment assignment models are misspecified, propensity-score stratification is likely to reduce bias, if not eliminate it.
Now if casual models of treatment assignment favourably reduce the dimension of x,
then dimension reductions of x that arise from modelling p(yc |x) should be favourable
as well, either as alternatives or as complements to propensity scores.
1.1 Prognostic scores
If Ψ(X) is sufficient for Yc , in the sense that Yc ⊥ X|Ψ(X), say Ψ(X) is a prognostic
score. Should Yc follow a shift model, p(yc |x) ≡ fc (yc − h(x)) for some fixed fc , then
h(X) is a prognostic score. Should Yc |X follow a generalized linear model (McCullagh
and Nelder 1989), then the linear predictor of Yc given X is a prognostic score, as

2

is the scalar E(Yc |X). The propensity score, E(Z|X), is also a sufficient statistic,
sufficient for Z rather than Yc ; whereas propensities are scalars, when Yc is not binary
there may be multi-dimensional but not scalar prognostic scores. Should Yc have a
linear regression on X, for example, but with non-constant variance that is linear in
X, then the regression and variance functions taken together constitute a prognostic
score. In prognostic scoring, one fits a model of p(yc |x) to some set of control subjects,
extrapolating this fit to intervention and control subjects being compared.
In many settings, information about response in the absence of treatment, Yc , is
more available than is data on responses of treated subjects, Yt ; prognostic scores’
definition reflects an assumption that this is the case. When the reverse is true, it
may be appropriate to attend to sufficient statistics for Yt rather than Yc ; if so, much
of what follows remains true provided that controls are relabelled as treatments, and
vice versa.
A sufficient statistic for Yc is not necessarily sufficient for Yt . The difference has
to do with the possibility that a covariate or function of the covariates modifies the
effect of treatment; indeed, it suggests a general perspective on effect modification.
Say there is no effect modification if any prognostic score Ψ(X) is sufficient for Yt
as well as Yc ; and say m(X) is an effect modifier if for any prognostic score Ψ(X),
(Ψ(X), m(X)) is sufficient for Yt , while at least one prognostic score Ψ(X) is not
sufficient for Yt . Effect modification is sometimes identified with the presence of
interaction terms involving Z in regression models for pr(Y |Z, X); these definitions
support that usage, but also apply when there is no linear predictor in view. They
allow that there may be effect modification even when response surfaces for Yt and
Yc given X are parallel, if for instance the dispersion of Yt depends on X in a way
that Yc ’s dispersion does not. Whenever pr(Yt |Yc , X) = pr(Yt |Yc ), on the other hand,
there can be no effect modification. Section 2 tracks various implications of effect
3

modification and its absence.
1.2 Precedents
Peters (1941), Belson (1956), Cochran (1969), Rubin (1984) and Gastwirth and
Greenhouse (1995) suggest extracting Ê(Yc |X = x) from a parametric model fit to
the control group, then estimating the treatment effect as the treatment group mean
of yi − Ê(Yci |X = xi ). Miettinen (1976) proposes regression of Y on Z and X, followed by subclassification on the part of the linear predictor that is free of Z. Zhao
(2004), in a suggestion echoed by Imbens (2004), proposes matching on a weighted
combination of differences in covariates, using separate control- and treatment-group
regressions of Y on X to determine the weights.
In contrast with the Peters-Belson and Zhao techniques, the primary aim of prognostic scoring is to reduce the dimension of the covariate; it combines with other
techniques, such as matching or propensity scoring. Miettinen’s scores sometimes
coincide with prognostic scores, although with due attention to issues to be discussed
in Section 3, estimated prognostic scores will generally differ from Miettinen’s scores.

2 Prognostic Conditioning: Population Theory
2.1 Prognostic balance
Conditioning on the propensity score, φ(x) ≡ E(Z|X = x), secures a form of covariate
balance:
X ⊥ Z|φ(X)
(Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983, Thm. 1). Within level sets of the propensity score,
no covariate associates with membership in the treatment or the control group. A
quintessential benefit of experimental randomization is its tendency to impose this
absence of association, here called “propensity balance.” An observational study

4

exhibiting propensity balance on scientifically important covariates is experimentlike, in that it resembles a randomized trial in salient observed characteristics.
In a second experimental ideal, it is the process by which outcomes are generated
that is repeatable, understood, and carefully controlled, not the process of assigning units to treatment. Studies approaching this ideal use experimental control in
the interest of removing associations between covariates and potential outcomes, not
treatment assignment. If in advance of studying a new experimental manipulation,
an investigator conducts tests absent the new manipulation in order to better understand accompanying conditions and their influence on the outcome, then it is this
second ideal that her procedure seeks to attain. Such preparations may incompletely
control those non-experimental factors with the potential to influence the outcome
of the trial, but they will have succeeded if in their wake uncontrolled variation in
such factors does not systematically associate with trial outcomes. Should she subsequently document a systematic association between experimental manipulations and
trial outcomes, this will be evidence of a treatment effect.
This form of balance — similarity among the covariate distributions of trials or
subjects with contrasting potential outcomes, Yc ⊥ X — is quite distinct from propensity balance, Z ⊥ X. Call it prognostic balance. Principles of sufficiency and of conditional independence support a theory of prognostic balance that parallels Rosenbaum
and Rubin’s (1983) account of propensity balance, with a few important differences.
Proposition 1 Let Yc be potential response to control. Then Ψ(X) is a prognostic
score if and only if conditioning on it induces prognostic balance within domains
determined by X —
Yc ⊥ X|Ψ(X), X ∈ A
— where A may be any measurable set.
5

(1)

If m(X) is an effect modifier, then in addition to (1) one has Yt ⊥ X|Ψ(X), m(X), g(X)
for all measurable g(·).
Proof of Proposition 1. The ‘if’ implication is immediate. For the other
direction, given A let g(x) = 1 if x ∈ A, 0 otherwise. Since (Ψ(X), g(X)) is sufficient
for Yc if Ψ(X) is, (1) follows from the definition of a prognostic score.
Proposition 1 supports the checking of prognostic scores on samples from which
treatment has been entirely withheld. Since Yc is observed only when Z = 0, it does
not suggest any practicable tests for samples containing both control and treatment
subjects. For those settings another principle is needed, one that is valid only in the
absence of hidden bias, or confounding due to omitted variables: i.e., only when

Yc ⊥ Z|X.

(2)

This added condition marks one noteworthy difference between prognostic and propensity diagnostics: propensity balance can validly be assessed even when important
confounders have been omitted. (But note that in that case propensity balance is no
longer sufficient for causal inference.)
Proposition 2 In the absence of hidden bias (2), Ψ(X) is a prognostic score if and
only if conditioning on it induces prognostic balance over domains determined jointly
by X and Z: for any (measurable) A,

Yc ⊥ X|Ψ(X), (X, Z) ∈ A.

Proof of Proposition 2. The ‘if’ direction is immediate. For ‘only if,’ Yc ⊥ Z|X
says that pr(Yc ∈ ·|Z, X) ≡ pr(Yc ∈ ·|X); so pr(Yc ∈ ·|Z, X, Ψ(X)) ≡ pr(Yc ∈
·|X, Ψ(X)). Since Ψ(X) is a prognostic score, pr(Yc ∈ ·|Z, X, Ψ(X)) ≡ pr(Yc ∈
6

·|Ψ(X)) follows. In particular, pr(Yc ∈ ·|X, (Z, X) ∈ A, Ψ(X)) ≡ pr(Yc ∈ ·|Ψ(X)) ≡
pr(Yc ∈ ·|(Z, X) ∈ A, Ψ(X)). 
2.2 Absence of confounding within prognostically balanced strata
Proposition 3 If there is no hidden bias (2), conditioning on a prognostic score
deconfounds potential responses from treatment assignment:

Yc ⊥ Z|Ψ(X), X ∈ A,

for any A. If also Yt ⊥ Z|X, and there is no effect modification, then (for any A)

Yt ⊥ Z|Ψ(X), X ∈ A.

Proof of Proposition 3. Combining (2) with the defining property of prognostic
scores,
pr(Yc , Z|X) = pr(Yc |X)pr(Z|X) = pr(Yc |Ψ(X))pr(Z|X).

(3)

The joint distribution of Yc and Z given Ψ(X), then, is expressible as the product
of the distribution of Yc given b(X) and a distribution produced by conditioning the
propensity score, E(Z|X), on Ψ(X). For the claim about Yt , no effect modification
entails this demonstration’s validity when Yt is substituted for Yc throughout. 
2.3 Direct adjustment with prognostic scores
In the absence of hidden bias, by prognostic score subclassification one can estimate
treatment’s effects upon treatment-group subjects, provided that there is no level of
the prognostic subclassification at which subjects receive the treatment with certainty.
This parallels a principle of propensity subclassification, with the difference that in
7

propensity subclassification it is required that there be no level of the unreduced
covariate at which subjects receive the treatment with certainty (Rosenbaum and
Rubin 1983; Heckman et al. 1998). The propensity condition may fail while the
weaker condition, on prognostic scores, holds.
Proposition 4 Suppose X deconfounds Yc and Z, Yc ⊥ Z|X, and that with probability one, pr(Z = 1|Ψ(X)) < 1. Then

E(Yt − Yc |Z = 1) = E{E(Y |Z = 1, Ψ(X)) − E(Y |Z = 0, Ψ(X))|Z = 1}.

(4)

Proof of Proposition 4. Certainly E(Y |Z = 1, Ψ(X)) = E(Yt |Z = 1, Ψ(X)) and
E(Y |Z = 0, Ψ(X)) = E(Yc |Z = 0, Ψ(X)), while Proposition 3 entails that E(Yc |Z =
0, Ψ(X)) = E(Yc |Z = 1, Ψ(X)): in short, E(Y |Z = 1, Ψ(X)) − E(Y |Z = 0, Ψ(X)) =
E(Yt − Yc |Z = 1, Ψ(X)).
Prognostic stratification, then, permits estimation of E(Yt − Yc |Z = 1) under a
weaker condition than does stratification on the propensity score. To estimate E(Yt −
Yc ), the two approaches strengthen the conditions of Proposition 4 in parallel ways;
but then prognostic stratification sometimes imposes an additional requirement. If
there is effect modification, then valid estimation of overall treatment effects requires
that it be captured in the conditioning statement.
Proposition 5 In the setting of Proposition 4, suppose in addition that pr(Z =
1|Ψ(X)) > 0 with probability 1, and Yt ⊥ Z|X. If m(X) modifies the effect of
treatment, then

E(Yt − Yc ) = E{E(Y |Z = 1, Ψ(X), m(X)) − E(Y |Z = 0, Ψ(X), m(X))};

8

(5)

while if there is no effect modification then

E(Yt − Yc ) = E{E(Y |Z = 1, Ψ(X)) − E(Y |Z = 0, Ψ(X))}.

(6)

Proof of Proposition 5. For (5), observe that the initial assumptions entail
E(Y |Z = 0, Ψ(X), m(X)) = E(Yc |Ψ(X), m(X)), whereas the additional assumptions
give E(Y |Z = 1, Ψ(X), m(X)) = E(Yc |Ψ(X), m(X)). When there is no effect modification, m(X) in (5) can be taken to be degenerate, and (6) follows.

3 Estimating Prognostic Scores: Two Caveats
Like the basic theory of propensity scores (as given by Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983),
Propositions 1–5 refer literally only to unlikely cases in which the form of the score
is specifically known. In practice, both propensity and prognostic scores must be
approximated, typically through the specification and fitting of a model. One hopes
that estimated scores sufficiently like a known score in terms of balance (here, Propositions 1 and 2) will share in known scores’ capacity to deconfound treatment effects
(Propositions 3– 5). As it pertains to propensity scores, the hypothesis has been corroborated in a variety of studies (see e.g. Drake 1993; Dehejia and Wahba 1999; Rubin
and Thomas 2000; Kurth et al. 2006; Rubin and Stuart 2006); however, propensity
balance can be checked for a whole sample, whereas prognostic balance can ordinarily
be checked only in the control group. What does this suggest about adjustment with
prognostic scores?

9

3.1 The difficulty with same-sample estimation
Overfitting affects both prognostic score and propensity estimation, but the fact that
only controls contribute to the estimation of prognostic scores makes overfitting more
acute for them, and potentially more consequential. To fix ideas, let there be treatment and control groups of size n = 500, in both of which Yc and X1 , . . . , X10 are
independent standard Normal, and suppose a propensity score fitted by logistic regression of Z on X, with the prognostic score taken to be the linear regression of
Yc on X, as fitted to the control group only. Suppose for now that no additional
control observations are available for fitting the prognostic score: this is same-sample
estimation. Despite the absence of structural propensity or prognostic relationships,
and the fact that neither of these regressions are likely to be declared significant by
ordinary F tests with appropriate degrees of freedom, simulation readily verifies that
with high probability, sample deciles of the estimated propensity appear significantly
to predict membership in the treatment group, and sample deciles of the estimated
prognostic score appear significantly to predict controls’ yc -values.
These spurious rejections do not in themselves speak against using either technique
to test for treatment effects, and indeed in this specific scenario such tests produce
false positives no more than they should. By an artifact of regression, at higher
deciles of the estimated prognosis controls have atypically high responses, while at
lower deciles controls’ responses are particularly low. However, the two biases tend
to cancel; see the simulation results in Table 1. When the treatment and control
groups are separated, however, so that comparisons of treatment and control subjects
are concentrated at one or the other ends of the scale, the two biases need no longer
compensate for one another. The potential for inference to be undermined in this way
affects the Peters-Belson and Miettinen approaches also, and has been discussed in

10

some detail by Barsky et al. (2002, § 2), who link it to issues of model misspecification.
Yet it can arise even if the prognostic model is well-specified, as Table 1 shows. In the
simulation reported in it, Y s and Xs were again unrelated but the two comparison
groups could differ in terms of X; when that difference is substantial, a prognostic
adjustment based on same-sample estimation of prognostic scores can be much worse
than no adjustment at all. The simulation also shows that the difficulty was mitigated
by estimating the scores on a separate sample of controls.
φ̄t − φ̄c
0
1
5
Stratification on:
propensity (φ̂(X))
.05 .05 .05
separate-sample Ψ̂(X) .05 .05 .05
.04 .05 .18
same-sample Ψ̂(X)
Table 1: Type I error rates after stratification on deciles of prognostic scores, as
estimated from the same and from a separate sample of controls. Simulation Yc
and X1 , . . . , X10 data were independent Normals, so that Yc and X had no systematic
relationship. The n = 500 controls had X1 ∼ N (0, 1) and the n = 500 treatments had
X1 ∼ N (0, 1), N (1, 1), or N (5, 1), while in other respects treatments’ and controls’
x-values followed the same distribution, so that φ(X) = X1 . Throughout, Yt was set
equal to Yc , propensity scores came from logistic regression of Z on X, prognostic
scores were the linear regression predictions of Yc , and the hypothesis that Yt ≡ Yc
was tested using a .05-level aligned rank test (Hodges and Lehmann 1963); based on
1000 replicates. The results suggest that same-sample estimation of prognostic scores
may make inference less reliable, particularly when treatment and control groups are
separated.

3.2 Should the treatment group contribute to the prognosis for controls?
If difficulties arise when a prognostic score must be extrapolated from a control to a
treatment group, a possible solution is to estimate the scores using a model fit to both
groups. This solution, however, opens the doors to problems of its own, except in the
uncommon event that much is known a priori about pr(Yt |Yc , X). Consider settings
such that neither E(Yc |X) nor E(Z|X) is flat, but the true prognostic and propensity
scores are unassociated. If treatment increases Y , but the analyst fits a regression ig11

noring the distinction between treatments and controls, then the estimated prognosis
will tend to be a mixture of the true propensity and prognostic scores. Adjusting for
it will tend to compare high propensity, low prognosis treatments to low propensity,
high prognosis controls, downwardly biasing estimates of the treatment effect.
In general, the problem is not fixed simply by adding Z to the regression and
taking as prognostic score the part of the linear predictor that is free of Z. To take
scenario of particular concern in economics (Heckman 1997), add to the previous
assumptions that E(Yt − Yc |X) increases with the propensity to receive treatment. If
the investigator fits an outcome regression with only a linear contribution from Z, then
again the estimated prognosis will be a mixture of the true prognostic and propensity
scores, because high-propensity treatments will tend to have larger y-values than lowpropensity treatment units irrespective of their prognostic scores; again the treatment
effect will be obscured. Were they available, checks of prognostic balance over the
whole sample would likely reveal such problems. Checks that can be made using only
the control group would not necessarily reveal them (although potentially a check for
prognostic balance along the estimated propensity score could).
To put the issue in more general terms, true prognostic scores and scores formed by
fitting a correct or incorrect model only to controls do not carry information about
E(Yt − Yc |Ψ(X)), E(Yt − Yc |Ψ̂(X)), or E(Yt − Yc |Z = 1) and the like, this fitting
being beyond the influence of any yt ’s. Alternately put, pr(Yc , Z, X) may be seen
as a nuisance parameter, in which case Ψ(X) and Ψ̂(X) are partial ancillaries for
the interest parameter pr(Yt |Yc , X). A conditionality principle supports conditioning
on such statistics (see, e.g., Cox and Hinkley 1974, §2.2.8 or Pace and Salvan 1997,
§4.2). True or estimated propensity scores are generally ancillary in this sense, even
if the estimate is based on a misspecified pr(Z|X), but prognostic scores fitted to
both groups may fail to be ancillaries.
12

4 Discussion
Prognostic scores are analogues of propensity scores, reductions of the covariate that
summarize information it carries about a response variable, as opposed to a treatment
variable. Their basic theory parallels that of propensity scores, in that true prognostic
scores impose on observational studies a form of balance comparable to what exists
in certain experiments, and in that in the absence of hidden bias, a score’s possessing
this balancing property means conditioning on it suffices for causal inference. Several
qualifications apply to this implication that would not apply to propensity scores,
however: diagnostics for prognostic balance that are available in a given sample are
inherently incomplete, in that they address only balance among controls; the fitting
of prognostic scores to the sample that is to be adjusted risks introducing bias, in a
manner that would not be detected by available balance assessments; using treatment
as well as control observations to fit prognostic scores may introduce bias if the pattern
of the treatment effect is not known in advance. These difficulties may be substantially
avoided if an alternate sample of controls, perhaps historical controls, are available
for the determination of the prognostic score, an approach with precedents in casecontrol matching (Silber et al. 2001). Prognostic balance assessment is an appealing
diagnostic for scores of this type.
Whenever conditioning on a prognostic score, Φ(X), purges treatment-control
comparisons of confounding due to X, so too does conditioning on that score and any
other function of the covariate. When there is effect modification, such conditioning
may be needed to estimate E(Yt − Yc ), although inference on E(Yt − Yc |Z = 1)
is generally possible without additional conditioning. Another attractive possibility
is to match or subclassify on both prognostic and propensity scores; in situations
where treatment and control samples are separated on the covariate, this may reduce

13

extrapolation, minimizing the impact of errors of estimation in the prognostic score
and of the impossibility of checking prognostic balance in the treatment group.
Because of this impossibility, and because of complications associated with effect modification, adjustment based on prognostic scores tends to require stronger
assumptions than propensity adjustment. However, § 2.3 noted one respect in which
prognostic adjustment makes weaker assumptions than propensity adjustment: inference after propensity adjustment requires that there be no level of X at which
treatment is received with certainty, whereas prognostic adjustment requires only
that there be no level of Ψ(X) at which treatment is certain. Regression discontinuity designs (RDs: Campbell and Stanley 1966; Berk and de Leeuw 1999; Hahn
et al. 2001) are characterized by the presence of a threshold in a covariate that
determines eligibility for the treatment, or perhaps compulsion to receive it. This
means that pr{pr(Z = 1|X) = 1} > 0, even that pr(Z = 1|X = x) = 1 for
most or all xs represented in the treatment group, so propensity adjustment is not
possible. However, it does not entail that the treatment group is characterized by
pr(Z = 1|Ψ(X) = Ψ(x)) = 1. It may be that after prognostic scoring, some RDs
can be deconfounded using propensity techniques. One might begin by constructing
a multidimensional score from the fitting of several candidate models to historical
controls, diagnosing its suitability in the manner indicated above. This process might
be repeated for each of several outcomes of interest, with the results joined into one
transformation Ψ̂(X) of the covariate. If observations on either side of the covariate threshold are comparable in respects that matter for the outcomes, then after
subclassifying on Ψ̂(X) there should be controls interspersed among the treatment
subjects. If so, the analysis could proceed as if X̃ = Ψ̂(X), not X, had been the
covariate; one might next match or subclassify on a “prognostic propensity,” φ(x̃),
alone or in combination with other functions of x̃.
14

Acknowledgements. The author acknowledges helpful discussions with Jake
Bowers, Jennifer Hill, Gary King, Paul Rosenbaum, Edward Rothman and Donald
Rubin, and the helpful comments of three anonymous reviewers. Rosenbaum brought
to his attention the issues discussed in § 3.1. Research support came from the U.S.
National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development and the U.S. National
Science Foundation.

References
Barsky, R., Bound, J., Charles, K. K., and Lupton, J. P. (2002), “Accounting for the
Black-White Wealth Gap: A Nonparametric Approach.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 97, 663–674.
Belson, W. A. (1956), “A technique for studying the effects of a television broadcast,”
Applied Statistics, 5, 195–202.
Berk, R. A. and de Leeuw, J. (1999), “An Evaluation of California’s Inmate Classification System Using a Generalized Regression Discontinuity Design,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 94, 1045–1052.
Campbell, D. and Stanley, J. (1966), Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs
for Research, Houghton Mifflin.
Cochran, W. G. (1969), “The Use of Covariance in Observational Studies,” Applied
Statistics, 18, 270–275.
Cox, D. R. and Hinkley, D. V. (1974), Theoretical Statistics, Chapman & Hall Ltd.
Dehejia, R. and Wahba, S. (1999), “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies:
Reevaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94, 1053–1062.
Drake, C. (1993), “Effects of Misspecification of the Propensity Score on Estimators
of Treatment Effect,” Biometrics, 49, 1231–1236.

15

Gastwirth, J. and Greenhouse, S. (1995), “Biostatistical concepts and methods in the
legal setting,” Statistics in Medicine, 14, 1641–53.
Hahn, J., Todd, P., and Van der Klaauw, W. (2001), “Identification and Estimation
of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,” Econometrica, 69,
201–209.
Heckman, J. (1997), “Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions in One Widely Used Estimator,” Journal of Human Resources, 32, 441–
462.
Heckman, J. J., Ichimura, H., and Todd, P. E. (1998), “Matching as an Econometric
Evaluation Estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261–294.
Hodges, J. L. and Lehmann, E. L. (1963), “Estimates of location based on rank tests
(Ref: V42 p1450-1451),” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 34, 598–611.
Holland, P. W. (1986), “Statistics and Causal Inference (with discussion),” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 81, 945–970.
Imbens, G. W. (2004), “Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects
under Exogeneity: A Review,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 4–29.
Kurth, T., Walker, A., Glynn, R., Chan, K., Gaziano, J., Berger, K., and Robins,
J. (2006), “Results of Multivariable Logistic Regression, Propensity Matching,
Propensity Adjustment, and Propensity-based Weighting under Conditions of
Nonuniform Effect,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 163, 262–270.
McCullagh, P. and Nelder, J. A. (1989), Generalized linear models (Second edition),
Chapman & Hall Ltd.
Miettinen, O. S. (1976), “Stratification by a Multivariate Confounder Score,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 104, 609–620.
Neyman, J. (1923), “On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments. Essay on principles. Section 9,” Statistical Science, 5, 463–480, 1990; transl.
16

by D.M. Dabrowska and T.P. Speed.
Pace, L. and Salvan, A. (1997), Principles of statistical inference: from a neoFisherian perspective, vol. 4 of Advanced series on statistical science & applied
probability, Singapore: World Scientific.
Peters, C. C. (1941), “A method of matching groups for experiment with no loss of
population,” Journal of Educational Research, 34, 606–612.
Rosenbaum, P. R. and Rubin, D. B. (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity
Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70, 41–55.
Rubin, D. B. (1977), “Assignment to Treatment Group on the Basis of a Covariate
(Corr: V3 P384),” Journal of Educational Statistics, 2, 1–26.
— (1984), “William G. Cochran’s Contributions to the Design, Analysis, and Evaluation of Observational Studies,” in W. G. Cochran’s Impact on Statistics, Wiley
(New York), pp. 37–69.
Rubin, D. B. and Stuart, E. A. (2006), “Affinely Invariant Matching Methods with
Discriminant Mixtures of Proportional Ellipsoidally Symmetric Distributions,” The
Annals of Statistics, 34, 1814–1826.
Rubin, D. B. and Thomas, N. (2000), “Combining Propensity Score Matching with
Additional Adjustments for Prognostic Covariates,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95, 573–585.
Silber, J., Rosenbaum, P., Trudeau, M., Even-Shoshan, O., Chen, W., Zhang, X.,
and Mosher, R. (2001), “Multivariate matching and bias reduction in the surgical
outcomes study,” Medical Care, 39, 1048–1064.
Zhao, Z. (2004), “Using Matching to Estimate Treatment Effects: Data Requirements,
Matching Metrics, and Monte Carlo Evidence,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86, 91–107.

17

