American Economic Association

General-Equilibrium Treatment Effects: A Study of Tuition Policy
Author(s): James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner and Christopher Taber
Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the
Hundred and Tenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (May, 1998), pp.
381-386
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/116952 .
Accessed: 07/05/2013 05:35
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
American Economic Review.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

TreatmentEffects:
General-Equilibrium
A Study of TuitionPolicy
By JAMES J. HECKMAN, LANCE LOCHNER, AND CHRISTOPHERTABER*
This paper considers the effects of changes
in tuition on schooling and earnings, accounting for general-equilibrium effects on skill
prices. The typical evaluation estimates the response of college enrollment to tuition variation using geographically dispersed cross
sections of individuals facing different tuition
rates. These estimates are then used to determine how subsidies to tuition will raise enrollment. The impact of tuition policies on
earnings is evaluated using a schoolingearnings relationship fit on pre-intervention
data and does not account for the enrollment
effects of the taxes raised to finance the tuition
subsidy. Thomas Kane (1994) exemplifies
this approach.
The danger in this widely used practice is
that what is true for policies affecting a small
number of individuals need not be true for
policies that affect the economy at large. A
national tuition-reduction policy that stimulates substantial college enrollment will
likely reduce college skill prices, as advocates of the policy claim. However, agents
who account for these changes will not enroll in school at the levels calculated from
conventional procedures, which ignore the
impact of the induced enrollment on earnings. As a result, standard policy-evaluation
practices are likely to be misleading about
the effects of tuition policy on schooling attainment and wage inequality. The empirical
question is: how misleading? We show that
these practices lead to estimates of enrollment responses that are more than ten times
larger than the long-run general-equilibrium
*
Heckman and Lochner: Department of Economics,
University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th Street, Chicago, IL
60637; Taber: Department of Economics, Northwestern
University, 2003 SheridanRoad, Evanston, IL 60208. We
thank Lars Hansen and Alice Nakamurafor helpful comments. This research was supported by a grant from the
Russell Sage Foundation and by NSF grant SBR-93-21048.

effects. We also improve on current practice
in the treatment-effects literature by considering both the gross benefits of the program
and the tax costs of financing the treatment
as borne by different groups.
Evaluating the general-equilibrium effects
of a national tuition policy requires more
information than the tuition-enrollment
parameter that is the centerpiece of partialequilibrium policy analysis. Most policy
proposals extrapolate well outside the range
of known experience and ignore the effects
of induced changes in skill quantities on skill
prices. To improve on current practice, we
have developed an empirically justified, dynamic, overlapping-generations, generalequilibrium framework for the pricing of
heterogeneous skills. It is based on an empirically grounded theory of the supply of
schooling and post-school human capital,
where different schooling levels represent
different skills. Individuals differ in learning
ability and in initial endowments of human
capital. Household saving behavior generates the aggregate capital stock, and output
is produced by combining the stocks of different human capitals with physical capital.
The framework explains the pattern of rising
wage inequality experienced in the United
States in the past 30 years (Heckman et al.,
1998). In this paper we apply this framework to evaluate tuition policies that attempt
to increase college enrollment.
The statistical and econometric literatureon
"treatment effects" is remarkable for its inattention to the market consequences of the
programs it evaluates. The widely used
"Rubin" model (Donald Rubin, 1978) assumes no interactions among the agents being
analyzed. The paradigmin the econometric literatureon treatmenteffects is that of evaluating the effectiveness of a drug. It assumes that
there are no spillovers to society at large that
flow from drug use (or "treatment") by
individuals.

381

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

382

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

The literaturein economics recognizes these
spillover effects. The classical analysis of union relative-wage effects by H. Gregg Lewis
( 1963 ) explicitly accounts for the discrepancy
between the effects of treatment(unionism) on
an individual and treatment applied to an industry when prices adjust to industry-wide
unionization levels. Our analysis extends
Lewis's static general-equilibriumframework
to a dynamic setting with skill formation.

MAY 1998

individuals who do not take advantage of the
subsidy. To pay for the subsidy, the highly educated would be taxed, and this may affect
their investment behavior. In addition, more
competitors for educated workers enter the
marketas a result of the policy, and their earings are depressed. Conventional methods
ignore the effect of the policy on nonparticipants. In order to account for these effects, it
is necessary to conduct a general-equilibrium
analysis.

I. ConventionalModelsof TreatmentEffects
The standard framework for a microeconometric program evaluation is partialequilibrium in character (see Heckman and
Richard Robb, 1985). For a given individual
i, Y0,iis defined to be the outcome the individual experiences if he does not participatein the
program, and Y1,iis the outcome he experiences if he does participate.The treatmenteffect for person i is Ai = Y1,i - Yo0i.When
interventions have general-equilibrium consequences, these effects depend on who else is
treatedand the marketinteractionbetween the
treated and the untreated.
To see the problems that arise in the standardframework,consider institutinga national
tuition policy. In this case, Y0,iis person i's
wage if he does not attend college, and Y1,iis
his wage if he does attend. The "parameter"
Ai then represents the impact of college, and
it can be used to estimate the impact of tuition
policies on wages. It is a constant, or policyinvariant, parameteronly if wages (Yoj,,Y1,i)
are invariant to the number of college and
high-school graduatesin the economy.
In a general-equilibriumsetting, an increase
in tuition increases the number of individuals
who attend college, which in turn decreases
the relative wages of college attendees, Y1,i/
Y0j. In this case, the programnot only impacts
the wages of individuals who are induced to
move by the program, but also has an impact
on the wages of those who do not. For two
reasons, then, the "treatment-effect" framework is inadequate.First, the parametersof interest depend on who in the economy is
"treated" and who is not. Second, these parametersdo not measure the full impact of the
program.For example, increasing tuition subsidies may increase the earningsof uneducated

II. ExploringIncreasesin TuitionSubsidies
in a General-Equilibrium
Model
We first simulate the effects of a revenueneutral $500 increase in tuition subsidy (financed by a proportional tax) on enrollment
in college and wage inequality starting from
a baseline economy that describes the United
States in the mid-1980's and that produces wage growth profiles and schoolingenrollment and capital-stock data that match
micro and macro statistics. The partialequilibrium increase in college attendance is
5.3 percent. This analysis holds skill prices
and, therefore, college and high-school wage
rates fixed-a typical assumption in microeconomic treatment-effectanalyses.
When the policy is evaluated in a generalequilibrium setting, the estimated effect falls
to 0.46 percent. Because the college-highschool wage ratio falls as more individuals attend college, the returns to college are less
than when the wage ratio is held fixed. Rational agents understandthis effect of the tuition policy on skill prices and adjust their
college-going behavior accordingly. Policy
analysis of the type offered in the treatmenteffect literature ignores the responses of rational agents to the policies being evaluated.
There is substantial attenuation of the effects
of tuition policy on capital and the stocks of
the different skills in our model. In our baseline specification, we allow skill prices and interest rates to adjustin general equilibriumbut
hold the pre-subsidy tuition level fixed. Simulating the policy under a numberof additional
alternative assumptions about the parameters
of the economic model, including a case where
tuition costs rise with enrollment, reproduces the basic result of substantial partial-

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

VOL. 88 NO. 2

COST-BENEFIT ANALYSISAND PROGRAMEVALUATION

equilibrium effects and much weaker generalequilibrium effects.
Our steady-stateresults are long-run effects.
When we simulate the model with rationalexpectations, the short-runenrollmenteffects are
also very small, as agents anticipatethe effects
of the policy on skill prices and calculate that
there is little gain from attending college at
higher rates. If we simulate using myopic expectations, the short-run enrollment effects
are much closer to the estimated partialequilibrium effects. All of these results are
qualitatively robust to the choice of different
tax schedules. Progressive tax schedules choke
off skill investment and lead to lower enrollment responses in general equilibrium.
We next consider the impact of a policy
change on discounted earnings and utility. We
decompose the total effects into benefits and
costs, including tax costs for each group. For
the sake of brevity, we report overall results,
and not the resultsby ability type. Table 1 compares outcomes in two steady states: (i) the
benchmarksteady state and (ii) the steady state
associated with the new tuition policy. Given
that the estimated general-equilibriumschooling response to a $500 subsidy is small, we
instead use an extremely high $5,000 subsidy
for the purpose of exploring generalequilibrium effects. The row "high-schoolhigh-school" reportsthe change in a variety of
outcome measures for those persons who
would be in high school under the benchmark
or new policy regime; the high-school-college
row reports the change in the same measures
for high-school studentsin the benchmarkwho
are induced to attend college only by the new
policy; college-high-school outcomes refer to
those personsin college in the benchmarkeconomy who only attendhigh school after the new
policy is put in place; and so forth.
By the measure of the present value of earnings, some of those induced to change are
worse off. Contrary to the monotonicity assumption built into the LATE parameter of
Guido Imbens and Joshua Angrist ( 1994), defined in this context as the effect of tuition
change on the earnings of those induced to go
to college, we find that the tuition policy produces a two-way flow. Some people who
would have attendedcollege in the benchmark
regime no longer do so. Again, contraryto the

383

TABLE 1-SIMULATED
EFFECTS OF A $5,000 TUITION
SUBSIDY ON DIFFERENT GROUPS: STEADY-STATE
CHANGES IN PRESENT VALUE OF LIFETIME WEALTH
(THOUSANDS OF 1995 DOLLARS)
(i)

(iii)

After-tax
After-tax
earnings
(ii)
earnings
After-tax
Group
net of
using
(proportion)a base tax earnings
tuition
High-schoolhighschool
(0.528)
High-schoolcollege
(0.025)
Collegehighschool
(0.003)
Collegecollege
(0.444)

9.512

-0.024

-4.231

-13.446

-46.711

-57.139

-7.654

-18.204

-0.024
1.529

-53.019
0.420

(iv)
Utility

-0.024
1.411

-0.879
0.420

Notes: Column (i) reports the after-tax present value of
earnings in thousandsof dollars discounted using the aftertax interest rate, where the tax rate used for the second
steady state is the base tax rate. Column (i) reportsjust the
effect on earnings; column (ii) adds the effect of taxes;
column (iii) adds the effect of tuition subsidies; and column (iv) includes the nonpecuniary costs of college, expressed in dollars.
a The groups denote counterfactualgroups. For example, the high-school-high-school group consists of individuals who would not attendcollege in either steady state,
and the high-school-college grou) would not attend college in the first steady state, but would in the second, etc.

implicit assumption built into LATE that only
those who change status are affected by the
policy, the rest of society also is affected by
the policy. People who would have gone to
college without the policy and continue to do
so afterthe policy is put in place are financially
worse off for two reasons: (i) the price of their
skill is depressed, and (ii) they must pay
higher taxes to finance the policy. However,
they now receive a tuition subsidy, and for this
reason, on net, they are slightly better off both
financially and in terms of utility. Those who
would abstain from attending college in both
steady states are essentially indifferent between them. They pay higher taxes, but their
skill becomes more scarce, and their wages
rise. Those induced to attend college by the

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

384

MAY 1998

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

policy are better off in terms of utility but are
not better off in terms of income. Note that
neither category of non-changers is a natural
benchmark for a "difference in differences"
estimator. The movement in their wages before and after the policy is due to the policy
and cannot be attributed to a benchmark
"trend" that is independent of the policy.
Table 2 presents the impact of the $5,000
tuition policy on the log earnings of individuals with ten years of work experience for different definitions of treatment effects. The
partial-equilibriumversion given in the first
column holds skill prices constant at initial
steady-state values. The general-equilibrium
version given in the second column allows
prices to adjust when college enrollment varies. Consider four parametersinitially defined
in a partial-equilibriumcontext. The average
treatmenteffect is defined for a randomly selected person in the population in the benchmark economy and indicates how that person
would gain in wages by moving from high
school to college. The parametertreatmenton
the treated is defined as the average gain over
the noncollege alternativeof those who attend
college. The parameter treatment on the untreated is defined as the average gain over the
college wage received by individuals who did
not attend college. The marginal treatmenteffect is defined for individuals who are indifferent between going to college or not. It is a
limit version of the LATE parameter under
conventional assumptions made in discretechoice theory (Heckman, 1997). Taber
( 1997) considers this parameterin his analysis
of schooling choices. Column (ii) presents the
general-equilibriumversion of these treatment
effects. Treatmenton the treated compares the
earnings of college graduates in the benchmark economy with what they would earn if
no one went to college.' Treatmenton the un-

' In the empirical general-equilibrium model of
Heckman et al. (1998), Inada conditions for college and
high school are not imposed, and the marginal product of
each skill group when none of it is utilized is a bounded
number. If Inada conditions were imposed, and the marginal productof a skill goes to infinity when the aggregate
quantity of skill in the economy goes to zero, the counterfactual and the counterfactual treatment on the untreated would not be defined.

PARAMETERS, PARTIALTABLE 2-TREATMENT-EFFECT
EQUILIBRIUM AND GENERAL-EQuILIBRIUM (GE)
DIFFERENCE IN LOG EARNINGS: COLLEGE GRADUATES
(COL) VERSUS HIGH-SCHOOL GRADUATES (HS)
WITH TEN YEARS OF WORK EXPERIENCE

(i)

Parameter

(ii)

Prices
fixed

Prices
vary

0.281

1.801

0.294

3.364

Average treatment
effect (ATE)
Treatmenton
treated (TI)
Treatmenton
untreated
(TOU)
Marginal treatment
effect (MTE)

0.270

-1.225

(iii)

Percentage
of sample
100
44.7
55.3

0.259

0.259

0.255
0.253

0.227

23.6
2.48

0.393

0.365

0.34

0.244

2.82

LATE, $5,000 subsidy:
Partial equilibrium
GE (HS-COL)
LATE
GE (COL-*HS)
LATER
GE net TLATE

-

-

LATE $500 subsidy:
Partialequilibrium
GE (HS-COL)
LATE
GE (COL-+HS)
LATER
GE net TLATE

0.254
0.250

0.247

2.37
0.24

0.393

0.390

0.03

0.264

0.27

-

-

Notes: (i) "Prices fixed" denotes the difference in log
earnings between college and high-school graduates for
various groups. Prices are held constant at their initial
steady-state levels when wage differences are calculated.
In column (ii) we allow prices to adjust in response to the
change in schooling proportions when calculating wage
differences. For each row, column (iii) presents the total
fraction of the sample over which the parameteris defined.
The LATE group denotes the effect on earnings for persons who would be induced to attend college by a tuition
change. In the case of GE, LATE measures the effect on
individuals induced to attend college when skill prices adjust in response to quantity movements among skill
groups. The partial-equilibriumLATE measures the effect
of the policy on those induced to attendcollege when skill
prices are held constant at the benchmarklevel.

treated is defined analogously by comparing
what high-school graduates in the benchmark
economy would earn if everyone in the population were forced to go to college. The average treatment effect compares the average

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

VOL. 88 NO. 2

COST-BENEFIT ANALYSISAND PROGRAMEVALUATION

earnings in a world in which everyone attends
college against the earnings in a world in
which nobody attends college. Such dramatic
policy shifts produce large estimated effects.
In contrast, the general-equilibriummarginal
treatment-effectparameterconsiders the gain
to attending college for people on the margin
of indifference between attending college and
attending high school. In this case, as long as
the mass of people in the indifference set is
negligible, the partial-and general-equilibrium
parametersare the same.
The final set of parameterswe consider are
versions of the LATE parameter.This parameter depends on the particular intervention
being studied and its magnitude. The partialequilibriumversion of LATE is defined for the
outcomes of individuals induced to attendcollege, assuming that skill prices do not change.
The general-equilibriumversion is defined for
the individuals induced to attendcollege when
prices adjustin response to the policy. The two
LATE parametersare quite close to each other
and are also close to the marginal treatment
effect.2 General-equilibriumeffects change the
group over which the parameter is defined
compared to the partial-equilibrium case.
For the $5,000 subsidy, there are substantial
price effects, and the partial-equilibriumparameterdiffers substantiallyfrom the generalequilibriumparameter.
We also present partial- and generalequilibriumestimates for two extensions of the
LATE concept: LATER (the effect of the policy on those induced to drop out of college and
go to high school; reverse LATE) and TLATE
(the effect of the policy on all of those induced
to change whichever direction they flow).
LATER is larger than LATE, indicating that
those induced to drop out of college have
larger gains from dropping out than those induced to enter college have from entering.
TLATE is a weighted average of LATE and
LATER, with weights given by the relative

2The latter is a consequence of the discrete-choice
framework we use to model schooling choices in our
model (see Heckman, 1997).

385

proportion of people who switch in each
direction.
III. Summary
This paper defines and estimates generalequilibrium treatment effects. Focusing on
the impact of tuition policy, we find that
general-equilibriumimpacts of tuition on college enrollment are an order of magnitude
smaller than those reported in the literature
on microeconometric treatment effects. The
assumptions used to justify the LATE parameter in a microeconomic setting do not carry
over to a general-equilibrium framework.
Policy changes, in general, induce t;wo-way
flows and violate the monotonicity (or oneway flow) assumption of LATE. We extend
the LATE concept to allow for the two-way
flows induced by the policies. We present a
more comprehensive approach to program
evaluation by considering both the tax and
benefit consequences of the program being
evaluated and placing the analysis in a market
setting.
REFERENC'ES
Heckman,James. "Instrumental Variables: A
Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions
in One Widely Used Estimator." Journal of
Human Resources, Summer 1997, 32(3),
pp. 441-62.
Heckman, James; Lochner, Lance and Taber,
Christopher."Explaining Rising Wage Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic
General Equilibrium Model of Labor
Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents."
Review of Economic Dynamics, 1998
(forthcoming).
Heckman,JamesJ. and Robb, Richard, Jr. "AlternativeMethods for Estimatingthe Impact
of Interventions," in JamiesJ. Heckman and
Burton Singer, eds., Longitudinal analysis
of labor market data. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985, pp. 156245.
Imbens,Guidoand Angrist,Joshua."Identification and Estimation of Local Average

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

386

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

Treatment Effects." Econometrica, March
1994, 62(2), pp. 467-75.
Kane,Thomas."College Entryby Blacks Since
1970: The Role of College Costs, Family
Background, and the Returns to Education." Journal of Political Economy, October 1994, 102(5), pp. 878-911.
Lewis,H. Gregg.Unionism and relative wages.
Chicago:Universityof Chicago Press, 1963.

MAY 1998

Rubin,Donald."Bayesian Inference for Causal
Effects: The Role of Randomization." Annals of Statistics, January 1978, 6(1), pp.
34-58.
Taber, Christopher. "The Rising College
Premium in the Eighties: Returns to College or Returns to Ability?" Unpublished
manuscript, Northwestern University,
1997.

This content downloaded from 130.82.1.40 on Tue, 7 May 2013 05:35:48 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

