Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and Econometric Policy Evaluation Author(s): James J. Heckman and Edward Vytlacil Source: Econometrica, Vol. 73, No. 3 (May, 2005), pp. 669-738 Published by: The Econometric Society Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3598865 Accessed: 17-10-2019 16:03 UTC REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3598865?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Econometric Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Econometrica
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Econometrica, Vol. 73, No. 3 (May, 2005), 669-738
STRUCTURAL EQUATIONS, TREATMENT EFFECTS, AND ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION'
BY JAMES J. HECKMAN AND EDWARD VYTLACIL
This paper uses the marginal treatment effect (MTE) to unify the nonparametric literature on treatment effects with the econometric literature on structural estimation using a nonparametric analog of a policy invariant parameter; to generate a variety of treatment effects from a common semiparametric functional form; to organize the literature on alternative estimators; and to explore what policy questions commonly used estimators in the treatment effect literature answer. A fundamental asymmetry intrinsic to the method of instrumental variables (IV) is noted. Recent advances in IV estimation allow for heterogeneity in responses but not in choices, and the method breaks down when both choice and response equations are heterogeneous in a general way.
KEYWORDS: Instrumental variables, selection models, program evaluation.
EVALUATING THE IMPACTS OF PUBLIC POLICIES, forecasting their effects in new environments, and predicting the effects of policies never tried are three central tasks of economics. The structural approach and the treatment effect approach are two competing paradigms of policy evaluation.
The structural approach emphasizes clearly articulated economic models that can be used to accomplish all three tasks under the exogeneity and parameter policy invariance assumptions presented in that literature (see Hansen and Sargent (1981), Hendry (1995)). Economic theory is used to guide the construction of models and to suggest included and excluded variables. The functional form and exogeneity assumptions invoked in this literature are sometimes controversial (see, e.g., Angrist and Krueger (1999)) and the sources of identification of parameters of these models are often not clearly
articulated.
1This paper was presented by Heckman as the Fisher-Schultz Lecture at the Eighth World Meetings of the Econometric Society, Seattle, Washington, August 13, 2000. Because of its coauthorship, this lecture was subject to the usual refereeing practices of Econometrica and has been through two rounds of reviews. This paper was also presented at the seminar on Applied Price Theory at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago in October 2000, at a seminar at Uppsala University in December 2000, at Harvard University in April 2001, and at the Montreal Econometrics Seminar in September 2003. We thank Jaap Abbring, Richard Blundell, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments on the first round reports. We benefited from the close reading by Ricardo Avelino, Jean-Marc Robin, Sergio Urzua, and Weerachart Kilenthong on the second draft. We have benefited from a close reading by Jora Stixrud and Sergio Urzua on the third draft. We have also benefited from comments by an anonymous referee on the second draft of this paper. Sergio Urzua provided valuable research assistance in programming the simulations reported in this paper and was assisted by Hanna Lee. Urzua made valuable contributions to our understanding of the random coefficient case and cases with negative weights, and made numerous valuable comments on this draft, as did Weerachart Kilenthong. See our companion paper (Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil (2004)), where these topics are developed further. This research was supported by NSF 97-09-873, NSF 00-99195, NSF SES-0241858, and NICHD-40403-000-85-261, and the American Bar Foundation.
669
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

670 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
The treatment effect literature as currently develope task-evaluating the impact of a policy in place-in t there is a "treatment group" and a "comparison gr nonparticipants. In the language of that literature, "in primary goal and issues of forecasting out of sample or cies receive little attention.2 Because of its more limit functional form and exogeneity assumptions are invok treatment effects has given rise to a new language of e where the link to economic theory is often obscure an questions being addressed are not always clearly stated. answer different economic questions that typically are tionships among the policy parameters implicitly define of instruments are not articulated.
This paper unites the two approaches to policy evaluation using the marginal treatment effect (MTE) under the assumption that analysts have access to treatment and comparison groups. The MTE is the mean response of persons to treatment at a margin that is precisely defined in this paper. It is a willingness to pay measure when outcomes are values under alternative treatment regimes.
Under the conditions specified in this paper, the MTE can be used to construct and compare alternative conventional treatment effects, a new class of policy relevant treatment effects, and the probability limits produced from instrumental variable estimators and matching estimators. Using the MTE, this paper unites the selection (control function) approach, defined in a nonparametric setting, with the recent literature on instrumental variables.
A major focus in the recent microeconomic policy evaluation literature, and a major theme of this paper, is on constructing and estimating models with heterogeneity in responses to treatment among otherwise observationally identical people. This literature emphasizes that responses to treatment vary among observationally identical people and, crucially, that agents select (or are selected) into treatment at least in part based on their own idiosyncratic response to it. This emphasis is in marked contrast to the emphasis in the conventional representative-agent macro-time-series literature that ignores such heterogeneity despite ample microeconometric evidence on it.3
Entire classes of econometric evaluation estimators can be organized by whether or not they allow for the possibility of selection based on unobserved components of heterogeneous responses to treatment. In the presence of such
heterogeneity, a variety of different mean treatment effects can be defined for
2Internal validity means that a treatment parameter defined in a specified environment is free of selection bias. It is defined more precisely below.
3Heckman (2001) summarizes the evidence on heterogeneity in responses to treatment on which agents select into treatment.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 671
different instruments and conditioning sets. In the absence ity, these different treatment effects collapse to the same p
The dependence of estimated treatment parameters on in important and not widely understood feature of models w responses on which people act.5 Instrument-dependent p this class of models, something excluded by assumption in c tural econometric models that emphasize the estimation of meters. Two economists analyzing the same dataset but usi instruments will estimate different parameters that have d interpretations. Even more remarkably, two economists usin ment but with different notions about what variables belo tions will interpret the output of an instrumental variable a Intuitions about "identifying strategies" acquired from anal models where responses to treatment do not vary among pe in the more general setting analyzed in this paper. The ch ment defines the treatment parameter being estimated. The regarding the choice of instrumental variables in the gene studied in this paper is "What parameter is being identified by rather than the traditional question of "What is the effici instruments for a fixed parameter?"-the question that has t pied the attention of econometricians who study instrume Even in the presence of least squares bias, and even assumi IV based on classical assumptions may be more biased for a rameter than ordinary least squares (OLS). The cure may b
disease.
We extend the method of instrumental variables to estimate economically interpretable parameters in models with heterogeneous treatment outcomes. We note a fundamental asymmetry intrinsic to the method of instrumental variables. Treatment outcomes can be heterogeneous in a general way that we make precise in this paper. Choice equations cannot be heterogeneous in the same general way. When choices and treatment outcomes are analyzed symmetrically, the method of instrumental variables and our extension of it breaks down, and more explicit structural approaches are necessary to solve policy evaluation problems.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 1 presents a prototypical microeconometric structural model as a benchmark to define and motivate the
various treatment parameters used in the literature and to compare and contrast structural estimation approaches with those used in the literature on treatment effects. We then define our general model and assumptions in Section 2. Our model extends the treatment effect literature by introducing choice
4See Heckman (1997), Heckman and Robb (1985, 1986 (reprinted 2000)), and Heckman and Vytlacil (1999).
5This dependence was first noted by Heckman and Robb (1985, p. 196). See also Angrist, Graddy, and Imbens (2000).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

672 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
theory into it and by using a weaker set of assumptio the structural literature to define and identify the mar This section shows how the MTE can be used to genera ious treatment parameters advocated in the recent lite economic foundation for the treatment effect literature. We derive a set of testable restrictions implied by our model, and we apply the general analysis to the special case of a parametric generalized Roy model.
The conventional treatment parameters do not, in general, answer questions of economic or policy interest. Section 3 shows how to use the MTE to define policy relevant parameters that answer well-posed economic questions. Evaluation of different policies requires different weights for the MTE. The MTE plays the role of a policy invariant structural parameter in conventional econometrics for a class of policy interventions defined in this paper.6
Section 4 organizes entire classes of econometric estimators on the basis of what they assume about the role of unobservables in the MTE function, conditional on X. Our analysis shows that traditional instrumental variables procedures require that the marginal treatment effect is the same for all persons of given X characteristics. When the marginal treatment effect varies over individuals with the same X, we show how the instrumental variables estimand (the probability limit of the instrumental variables estimator) can be written as a weighted average of MTE, where our general expressions nest previous results in the literature as special cases. The interpretation of the IV estimand depends not only on the choice of instrument used, but also on what other variables are included in the choice model even if they are not used as instruments. We show that it is not always possible to pick an instrument that answers a particular policy problem of interest, and we show that not all instruments answer well defined policy questions. We present necessary and sufficient conditions to construct an instrument to produce a particular policy counterfactual, and show how to construct the instrument when the conditions are satisfied. We de-
velop necessary and sufficient conditions for a particular instrument to answer some well defined policy question, and show how to construct the policy counterfactual when the conditions are satisfied. We focus on instrumental variables in this paper, but also consider matching and ordinary least squares as special cases of our general model for IV.
Section 5 returns to the policy evaluation problem. The treatment effect literature can be used to answer certain narrowly focused questions under weaker assumptions than are required to recover conventional structural parameters that answer a broad range of questions. When we attempt to address the broader set of questions entertained in the structural econometrics literature, additional conditions are required to extrapolate existing policies to new environments and to provide accurate forecasts of new policies
6Hendry (1995) discusses the role of policy invariant parameters in macro-forecasting and policy evaluation.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 673
never previously experienced. The weaker identifying assu the treatment effect literature are possible because of the questions addressed by that literature. In the language of th literature, internal validity (absence of selection bias) does n validity (the ability to generalize). When the same policy tions addressed by the structural literature are asked of th literature, the assumption sets used in the two literatures especially for nonparametric versions of structural models requires stronger conditions.
Section 6 discusses the fundamental role played by the as general forms of heterogeneity in choice equations invoked ature under the rubric of "monotonicity" assumptions. Wh treatment outcomes are modeled symmetrically, the meth variables breaks down, and a different approach to policy a Section 7 concludes.
1. A LATENT VARIABLE FRAMEWORK
The treatment effect literature investigates a class of policies that have partial participation at a point in time so there is a "treatment" group and a "comparison" group. It is not helpful in evaluating policies that have universal participation. In contrast, the structural econometrics literature can evaluate policies with universal participation by using functional form and support conditions to substitute for lack of a comparison group (see Heckman and Vytlacil (2005)). Throughout this paper we follow the conventional practice in the literature and ignore general equilibrium effects.7
To link our discussion to the literature on structural econometrics, it is fruitful to compare how the two different approaches analyze a generalized Roy model for two potential outcomes (Yo, Y1). This model is widely used in applied econometrics (see Amemiya (1985), Heckman (2001)).
Write potential outcomes (Yo, Y1) for conditioning variables X as
(la) Yo = to(X) + Uo
and
(lb) Yi = A,(X) + Uj,
where Y1 is the outcome if treated and Yo is the outcome if not treated.8 In a model of educational attainment, Y1 is the present value of college earn-
7See, however, the studies by Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998), who demonstrate the empirical importance of investigating general equilibrium effects in the context of evaluating the returns to schooling.
8Throughout this paper, we denote random variables/random vectors by capital letters and potential realizations by the corresponding lowercase letter. For example, X denotes the random vector and x denotes a potential realization of the random vector X.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

674 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
ings and Yo is the present value of earnings in the ben state (e.g., high school). Let D = 1 denote receipt of tre observed, while D = 0 denotes that treatment was not observed. In the educational attainment example, D = 1 lects into college; D = 0 otherwise. The observed outcom
(1c) Y = DY, + (1 - D)Yo.
Let
(id) C = tpc(Z) + Uc
denote the cost of receiving treatment. Net utility is the agent selects into treatment if the net utility fro
D = 1[D* > 0]. The original Roy (1951) model is a special case of this framework when
there are zero costs of treatment, luc(Z) = 0 and Uc = 0. The generalized Roy model allows for costs of treatment, both driven by observable determinants of the cost of treatment, Z, and unobservable determinants of the cost of treatment, Uc. For example, in the educational attainment example, tuition and family income operate through direct costs btc(Z) to determine college attendance, while Uc might include disutility from studying. The model can be generalized to incorporate uncertainty about the benefits and costs of treatment and to allow for more general decision rules. Let I denote the information set available to the agent at the time when the agent is deciding whether to select into treatment. If, for example, the agent selects into treatment when the expected benefit exceeds the expected cost, then the index is D* = E(YI - Yo - C1I). The decision to participate is based on I and D = 1I[D* > 0], where D* is a random variable measurable with respect to 1.9
Conventional approaches used in the structural econometrics literature assume that (X, Z) iL (Uo, U1, Uc), where iL denotes independence. In addition, they adopt parametric assumptions about the distributions of the error terms and functional forms of the estimating equations, and identify the full model that can then be used to construct a variety of policy counterfactuals. The most commonly used specification of this model writes Ato(X) = X3o, pI(X) = X38, I1c(Z) = Z/3c and assumes (Uo, U1, Uc) - N(0, ). This is the normal selection model (Heckman (1976)).
The parametric normal framework can be used to answer all three policy evaluation questions. First, it can be used to evaluate existing policies by asking how policy-induced changes in X or Z affect (Y, D). Second, it can be used to extrapolate old policies to new environments by computing outcomes for the values of X, Z that characterize the new environment. Linearity and distributional assumptions make extrapolation straightforward. Third, this framework
9See Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro (2005) for a version of this model.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 675
can be used to evaluate new policies if they can be expresse functions of (X, Z). For example, consider the effect of cha environment where tuition has never before been charged. I on the same footing as (made comparable with) another me is measured and varies, or with returns that can be measured can use the estimated response to the variation in observed estimate the response to the new tuition policy.10
This paper relaxes the functional form and distributiona in the structural literature and still identifies an economic model that can be used for policy analysis. Recent semipar relax both distributional and functional form assumptions els, but typically assume exogeneity of X (see, e.g., Powell estimate treatment effects except through limit argumen Andrews and Schafgans (1998)).11 The treatment effect liter pass the ad hoc assumptions used in the structural liter treatment effects under weaker conditions. The goal of th examine the effects of policies in place (i.e., to produce inter tors) rather than to forecast new policies or old policies on
2. TREATMENT EFFECTS
We now present the model of treatment effects developed in Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2001a), which relaxes most of the controversial assumptions discussed in Section 1. It is a nonparametric selection model with testable restrictions that can be used to unify the treatment effect literature, identify different treatment effects, link the literature on treatment effects to the literature in structural econometrics, and interpret the implicit economic assumptions underlying instrumental variables and matching methods. We follow Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2001a) in considering binary treatments. Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) and Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil (2004) extend this analysis to the case of a discrete, multivalued treatment, for both ordered and unordered models, while Florens, Heckman, Meghir, and Vytlacil (2004) develop a related model with a continuum of treatments.
We use the general framework of Section 1, Equations (la)-(ld), and define Y as the measured outcome variable. We do not impose any assumption on the support of the distribution of Y. We use the more general nonlinear
10For example, in a present value income maximizing model of schooling, costs and returns are on the same footing, so knowledge of how schooling responds to returns is enough to determine how schooling responds to costs. See Section 5.1.
'1A large part of the literature is concerned with estimation of slope coefficients (e.g., Ahn and Powell (1993)) and not the counterfactuals needed for policy analysis. Heckman (1990) develops the more demanding conditions required to identify policy counterfactuals.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

676 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
and nonseparable outcome model
(2a) Y = A, (X, UI),
(2b) Yo = 0to(X, Uo).
Examples include conventional latent variable models: Y, = 1 if Yi* = 1i(X) +
Ui > 0 and Y, = 0 otherwise; i = 0, 1. Notice that in the general case
LPi(X, U,) -E(Y IX) : U,, i = 0, 1, so even if the /, are structural, the E(YIX) are not.12
The individual treatment effect associated with moving an otherwise identical person from 0 to 1 is Y1 - Yo = A and is defined as the effect on Y of a ceteris paribus move from 0 to 1. These ceteris paribus effects are called causal effects. To link this framework to the literature on structural econometrics, we characterize the decision rule for program participation by an index model
(3) D* = AD(Z) - UD, D = 1 if D*>0, D = 0 otherwise,
where (Z, X) is observed and (U1, Uo, UD) is unobserved. The random v able UD may be a function of (Uo, UI). For example, in the Roy mod UD = U1 - Uo, and in the generalized Roy model, UD = U, - Uo - Uc. Witho loss of generality, Z includes all of the elements of X. However, our analy requires that Z contain at least one element not in X. The following assum
tions are weaker than those used in the conventional literature on structural econometrics or the recent literature on semiparametric selection models and at the same time can be used both to define and to identify different treatment parameters.13 The assumptions are the following:
(A-1) The term AD(Z) is a nondegenerate random variable conditional
on X.
(A-2) The random vectors (U,, UD) and (Uo, UD) are independent of Z
conditional on X.
(A-3) The distribution of UD is absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure.
(A-4) The values of Ej Y1 I and El Yoj are finite.
(A-5) 1 > Pr(D = 1IX) > 0.
Assumptions (A-1) and (A-2) are "instrumental variable" assumptions that there is at least one variable that determines participation in the program that is not in X and that is independent of potential outcomes (Yo, YI) given X. These are the assumptions used in the natural and social experiment literatures where randomization or pseudorandomization generates instruments.
12See Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) for alternative definitions of structure. 13As noted in Section 2.1 and Heckman and Vytlacil (2001a), a much weaker set of conditions is required to define the parameters than is required to identify them. As noted in Section 5, stronger conditions are required for policy forecasting.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 677
Assumption (A-2) also assumes that UD is independen is used below to generate counterfactuals. Assumption assumption made primarily for expositional convenience. guarantees that the conventional treatment parameters a sumption (A-5) is the assumption in the population of bo a control group for each X. Observe that there are no ments for X. This is in contrast to the assumptions comm conventional structural literature and the semiparametri (see, e.g., Powell (1994)). A counterfactual "no feedback" c
interpretability so that conditioning on X does not mask t ting Xd denote a value of X if D is set to d, leads to a suff
rules out feedback from D to X:
(A-6) X1 = Xo almost everywhere.
Condition (A-6) is not strictly required to formulate an evaluation model, but it enables an analyst who conditions on X to capture the "total" or "full effect" of D on Y (see Pearl (2000)). This assumption imposes the requirement that X is an external variable determined outside the model and is not affected by counterfactual manipulations of D. However, the assumption allows for X to be freely correlated with U1, U0, and UD so it can be endogenous in this sense. In this paper, we examine treatment effects conditional on X and we maintain assumption (A-6).
Define P(Z) as the probability of receiving treatment given Z: P(Z) Pr(D = 11Z) = FUDIX( D(Z)D), where FuD,x(-) denotes the distribution of UD conditional on X.14 We often denote P(Z) by P, suppressing the Z argument. As a normalization, we impose UD ~ Unif[0, 1] and AD(Z) = P(Z). This normalization is innocuous given our assumptions, because if the latent variable generating choices is D* = v(Z) - V, where V is a general continuous random variable, we can apply a probability transform to reparameterize the model so that ,AD(Z) = Fvx(v(Z)) and UD = FVIX().15
Vytlacil (2002) establishes that assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) for selection model (2a), (2b), and (3) are equivalent to the assumptions used to generate the local average treatment effects (LATE) model of Imbens and Angrist (1994). Thus the nonparametric selection model for treatment effects developed in
14Throughout this paper, we will refer to the cumulative distribution function of a random vector A by FA (.) and to the cumulative distribution function of a random vector A conditional on random vector B by FAIB('). We will write the cumulative distribution function of A conditional on B = b by FAIB(-lb).
15This representation is valid whether or not (A-2) is true. However, (A-2) imposes restrictions on counterfactual choices. For example, if a change in government policy changes the distribution of Z by an external manipulation, under (A-2) the model can be used to generate the choice probability from P(z) evaluated at the new arguments, i.e., the model is invariant with respect to the distribution Z.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

678 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
this paper is equivalent to an influential instrumental v ment effects. Our latent variable model satisfies their assumptions generate our latent variable model. Our la a version of the standard sample selection bias model.
Our model and assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) impose two te the distribution of (Y, D, Z, X). First it imposes an ind tion: for any measurable set A and for j = 0, 1,
Pr(Yj E AIX, Z, D = j) = Pr(Yj EAIX, P(Z), D
This restriction has empirical content when Z contain not in X. Second, the model also imposes a testable mo
in P = p for E(YDIX = x, P = p) and E(Y(1 - D)IX
develop in Appendix A. Even though the model of treatment effects develop
the most general possible model, it has testable implica cal content. It unites various literatures and produces a of the widely used selection model, and links the treatm nomic choice theory.
2.1. Definitions of Treatment Effects
The difficulty of observing the same individual in b treated states leads to the use of various population le widely used in the biostatistics literature and applied in commonly invoked treatment effect is the average tr
tYrAeaTtEm(xe)nt- rEa(nAdIoXm=lyxt),o w evheerryeonAe =ofYtjy-peYoX., Tahssiusmisintgh ignoring general equilibrium effects. The average im persons who actually take the treatment is treatme
A onr(xP)(Z-):E(AATIX(x,= px), =D E=(A 1)I.XTh=isxp, aPr(aZm) e=tepr, cDan=a1ls)o.1b7
The mean effect of treatment on those for whom X marginal treatment effect, plays a fundamental role in
(4) AMTE(x, UD) = E(AIX = x, UD = UD).
The MTE is the expected effect of treatment conditio teristics X and conditional on UD, the unobservables fr sion rule. For uD evaluation points close to zero, AMTE
16Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith (1999) discussed panel data cas observe both Yo and Y1 for the same person.
'7These two definitions of treatment on the treated are related by tioning p variable: Art(x) = foI AT(x, p) dF(z)IX,D(pix, 1), where F bution of P(Z) given X = x and D = 1.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 679
effect of treatment on individuals with the value of unobservables that make them most likely to participate in treatment and who would participate even if the mean scale utility AD(Z) were small. If UD is large, AtD(Z) would have to be large to induce people to participate.
One can also interpret E(AIX = x, UD = UD) as the mean gain in terms of Y, - Yo for persons with observed characteristics X who would be indifferent between treatment or not if they were exogenously assigned a value of Z, say z, such that ALD(Z) = Ud. When Y1 and Yo are value outcomes, MTE is a mean willingness to pay measure. The MTE is a choice-theoretic building block that unites the treatment effect, selection, and matching literatures.
A third interpretation is that MTE conditions on X and the residual defined by subtracting the expectation of D* from D*: UD = D* - E(D*IZ, X). These three interpretations are equivalent under separability in D*, i.e., when (3) characterizes the choice equation, but lead to three different definitions of MTE when a more general nonseparable model is developed. This point is developed further in Section 6.
The LATE parameter of Imbens and Angrist (1994) is a version of MTE. Define D, as a counterfactual choice variable with Dz = 1 if D would have been chosen if Z had been set to z and with Dz = 0 otherwise. Let Z(x) denote the support of the distribution of Z conditional on X = x. For any (z, z') e Z(x) x Z(x) such that P(z) > P(z'), LATE is E(AIX = x, Dz = 1, Dz, = 0) = E(Y1 YoIX = x, D, = 1, Dz, = 0), the mean gain to persons who would be induced to switch from D = 0 to D = 1 if Z were manipulated externally from z' to z. From the latent index model, it follows that LATE can be written as
E(Y1 - Yo X = x, Dz = 1, DZI = 0)
= E(Y - YoIX = x, u'< UD < UD)
= ,LATE(X, UD, UD)
for UD = Pr(Dz = 1) = P(z), uD = Pr(Dz, = 1) = P(z'), where assumption (A-2) implies that Pr(Dz = 1) = Pr(D = IIZ = z) and Pr(Dz, = 1) = Pr(D = IZ = z'). Imbens and Angrist define the LATE parameter as the
probability limit of an estimator. Their analysis conflates issues of definition of parameters with issues of identification. Our representation of LATE allows us to separate these two conceptually distinct matters and to define the LATE parameter more generally. One can imagine evaluating the right-hand side of this equation at any uD, uD points in the unit interval and not only at points in the support of the distribution of the propensity score P(Z) conditional on X = x where it is identified. From assumptions (A-2)-(A-4), ALATE(x, UD, U') is continuous in uD and uD, and lim u - UDALATE(X U, UD ) = AMTE(x, UD).18
18This follows from Lebesgue's theorem for the derivative of an integral and holds almost everywhere with respect to Lebesgue measure. The ideas of the marginal treatment effect and
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

680 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
TABLE IA TREATMENT EFFECTS AND ESTIMANDS AS WEIGHTED
AVERAGES OF THE MARGINAL TREATMENT EFFECT
ATE(x) = fAMTE(X, (UD)dUD TT(x) =j AMTE(X, UD)hTr(X, UD) duD
1 [f""M~e~xTu) du] LATE(x, UD, uD)= UD [UD AMTE(x, u)du]
TUT(x) = AMTE(x, UD)hTUT(X, uD)dUD PRTE(x) = MTE(x, UD)hPRTE(X, UD) duD
IV(x) = jAMTE(x, uD)hlv(x, UD)dUD
OLS(x) = AMTE(x, UD)hOLS(X, D) duD

Heckman and Vytlacil (1999) use assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) and the latent index structure to develop the relationship between MTE and the various treatment effect parameters shown in the first three lines of Table IA. For example, in that table A'T(x) is a weighted average of AMTE,

where

Ar(x) = fAMTE(X, UD)hTT(X, UD) duD,

1 - FtPIX(UD X) SPIX(UDIX)
(5) hTT(X, UD)= fo (1 - Fpix(tlx)) dt E(P(Z)IX = x) '

and SpIx(UDIX) is Pr(P(Z) > uDIX = x) and hnr(x, UD) is a weighted distribution (see Heckman and Vytlacil (2001a)). The parameter A'T(x) oversamples AMTE(x, UD) for those individuals with low values of UD that make them more likely to participate in the program being evaluated. Treatment on the untreated (TUT) is defined symmetrically with TT and oversamples those least
likely to participate. The various weights are displayed in Table LB. The other

the limit form of LATE were first introduced in the context of a parametric normal generalized
Roy model by Bj6rklund and Moffitt (1987), and were analyzed more generally by Heckman (1997). Angrist, Graddy, and Imbens (2000) also define and develop a limit form of LATE.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

hATE(X, UD) = 1

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 681
TABLE IB WEIGHTS

hTr(x, UD) = ff(pIX = x) dp IX = x)
hTUT(X, UD) = f[(pX = x)dp E((1-P)IX=x)

hPRTE(X, UD) = [FP,X(UDIX) - FPX(UDIX ) , where AP(x)= E(PX = x) - E(P*IX = x)
L AP(x)

hlv(x, UD)= (p - E(PX = x))f(pIX =x)dp Var(P
hoLs(X, uED(U )=IlI+XA=MxT,(XU,DU=D)UD)hl(X, UD) - E(UoIX =

= 0 otherwise

if AMTE(x, UD) : 0,

hi(x, uD) = [ f(plX = x)dP E(PIX = x)

ho(x, UD[) f= ufI(pIEX((=1x-) dPp)IEX((1 = x)

weights, treatment effects, and estimands shown in this table are discussed later. A central theme of this paper is that under our assumptions all estimators and estimands can be written as weighted averages of MTE.
Observe that if E(AIX = x, UD = UD) = E(AlX = x), so A is mean independent of UD given X = x, then AMTE = AATE = ATT = ALATE. Therefore, in cases where there is no heterogeneity in terms of unobservables in MTE (A constant conditional on X = x) or agents do not act on it so that UD drops out of the conditioning set, marginal treatment effects are average treatment effects, so that all of the evaluation parameters are the same. Otherwise, they are different. Only in the case where the marginal treatment effect is the average treatment effect will the "effect" of treatment be uniquely defined.
Figure 1A plots weights for a parametric normal generalized Roy model generated from the parameters shown at the base of Figure 1B. We discuss the contents of Figure 1B in Section 4. A high uD is associated with higher cost, relative to return, and less likelihood of choosing D = 1. The decline of MTE in terms of higher values of UD means that people with higher uD have lower gross returns. TT overweights low values of UD (i.e., it oversamples UD that make it likely to have D = 1). ATE samples UD uniformly. Treatment on the untreated (E(YI - YoIX = x, D = 0)) oversamples the values of UD unlikely to
have D = 1.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

682 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL

h(u D) MTE

3.5

0.35

3 MTE
2.5
TT

1.5

\

/

0.5 N

/ ATE

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
uD
FIGURE 1A.-Weights for the marginal treatment effect for different parameters.
Table II shows the treatment parameters produced from the different weighting schemes. Given the decline of the MTE in uD, it is not surprising that TT > ATE > TUT. The difference between TT and ATE is a sorting gain: E(Y1 - YolX, D = 1) - E(Y1 - YoIX), the average gain experienced by people who sort into treatment compared to what the average person would experience. Purposive selection on the basis of gains should lead to positive sorting gains of the sort found in the table. We return to this table to discuss the other
numbers in it.
Heckman (2001) presents evidence on the nonconstancy of the MTE drawn from a variety of studies of schooling, job training, migration, and unionism. With the exception of studies of unionism, a common finding in the empirical literature is the nonconstancy of MTE given X.19 The evidence from the literature suggests that different treatment parameters measure different effects and that persons participate in programs based on heterogeneity in responses to the program being studied. The phenomenon of nonconstancy of the MTE that we analyze in this paper is of substantial empirical interest.
The additively separable latent index model for D (Equation (3)) and assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) are far stronger than what is required to define the parameters in terms of the MTE. The representations of treatment effects defined in Table IA remain valid even if Z is not independent of UD, if there
19However, most of the empirical evidence is based on parametric models.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 683
MTE
hT(U ) h OLS (UD) 0.5
4
3-
2- ,**won
0 OLS 4b 4b
-2
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
UD
FIGURE 1B.-Marginal treatment effect vs. linear instrumental variables and ordinary least squares weights. Model used to generate Figures 1A and 1B:
Y, = y + c + U1, U1 = o' e, y = 0.67, o1 = 0.012, Yo = Y + Uo, Uo = o0e, a = 0.2, o0 = -0.050,
D = 1 if Z- V > 0, V = ov e, e 1 N(0, 1), av = -1.000,
UD = ( , Z - N(-0.0026, 0.2700).
TABLE II TREATMENT PARAMETERS AND ESTIMANDS IN THE
GENERALIZED ROY EXAMPLE
Treatment on the treated 0.2353 Treatment on the untreated 0.1574
Average treatment effect 0.2000 Sorting gaina 0.0353 Policy relevant treatment effect (PRTE) 0.1549
Selection biasb -0.0628 Linear instrumental variablesc 0.2013
Ordinary least squares 0.1725
a TT - ATE = E(Y1 - Y ID = 1) - E(Y1 - YO). b OLS - IT = E(Y ID = 1) - E(YID = 0). c Using propensity score P(Z) as the instrument. Note: The model used to create Table II is the same 1A and lB. The PRTE is computed using a policy t char If Z > 0 then D = 1 if Z(1 + t) - V > 0.
If Z < t then D = 1 if Z - V > 0. For this example t is set equal to .2.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

684 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
are no variables in Z that are not also contained in X, nonseparable choice model generates D (so D* = ID (Z is needed to define the parameters. These issues are di
tion 6.
Assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) will be used to interpret variables estimate and to relate instrumental variables
treatment effects. They are sufficient to identify AMT uation point that is a limit point of the support of th conditional on X = x.20 As developed in Section 6, with and representations (in particular Equation (3)) for the IV method and our extension of it does not identify a pretable parameters.
The literature on structural econometrics is clear abo ters of interest although it is not always clear about t of parameters needed to answer specific policy problem treatment effects offers a variety of evaluation parame literature is an algorithm for defining treatment effect formulated policy questions. The MTE provides a fram such an algorithm, which we now develop.
3. POLICY RELEVANT TREATMENT PARAMETERS
The conventional treatment parameters do not always answer economically interesting questions. Their link to cost-benefit analysis and interpretable economic frameworks is often obscure.22 Each answers a different question. Ignoring general equilibrium effects, A'T is one ingredient for determining whether or not a given program should be shut down or retained. It is informative on the question of whether the persons participating in a program benefit from it in gross terms.23 The parameter AMTE estimates the gross gain from a marginal expansion of a program. Many investigators estimate a treatment effect and hope that it answers an interesting question. A more promising approach to defining parameters is to postulate a policy question or decision problem
20For example, if we additionally impose that the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X has a density with respect to Lebesgue measure, then (A-1)-(A-5) enable us to identify AMTE(X, UD) at all (x, UD) evaluation points in the support of the distribution of (X, P(Z)).
21 In a fundamental paper, Marschak (1953) shows how different combinations of structural parameters are required to forecast the impacts of different policies. It is possible to answer many policy questions without identifying any of the structural parameters individually. The treatment effect literature partially embodies this vision, but typically does not define the economic question being answered, in contrast to Marschak's approach. See Heckman (2001) and Heckman and Vytlacil (2005).
22Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) develop the relationship between these parameters and the requirements of cost-benefit analysis.
23It is necessary to account for costs to conduct a proper cost-benefit analysis. See the discussion in Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) for nonparametric cost-benefit analysis.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 685
of interest and to derive the treatment parameter that an approach does not in general produce the conventional tr or the estimands produced from instrumental variables.
We consider a class of policies that affect P, the probabi in a program, but do not affect AMTE. The policies analyzed in fect literature that change the Z not in X are more restric policies that shift X and Z analyzed in the structural lite from the schooling literature would be policies that chang to school but do not directly affect the gross returns to ignore general equilibrium effects in this paper, the eff changes in the overall level of education are assumed to b
Let a and a' denote two potential policies, and let Da choices that would be made under policies a and a'. Le decision rules be Da = -[Pa(Za) > UD] and Da, = 1-[Pa Pa(Za) = Pr(Da = lZa) and Pa,(Zal) = Pr(Da' = 1Za,). T position, we will suppress the arguments of these functi Pa, for Pa(Za) and Pa,(Za,). Define (Yo,a, Yt,a, UD,a) as policy a, and define (Yo,a', Yi,a', UD,a') correspondingly un sume that Za and Za, are independent, respectively, of (Y (Yo,a', Yi,al, UD,a') conditional on Xa and Xa,. Let Ya = Da and Ya, = Da, Yi,a' + (1 - Da,) Yo,a denote the outcomes tha under policies a and a', respectively.
We define AMTE as policy invariant if
Policy Invariance: E(Yi,aIUD,a = u, Xa = x) and E(Yo,
are invariant to the choice of policy a.
Policy invariance can be justified by the strong assump change does not change the counterfactual outcomes, servables, i.e., (Yo,a, Yl,a, Xa, UD,a) = (Yo,a, Yi,a, Xa,, UD,a policy invariant if this assumption is relaxed to the weaker policy change does not affect the distribution of these v
on X:
(A-7) The distribution of (Yo,a, Yi,a, UD,a) conditional on Xa = x is the same
as the distribution of (Yo,a,, Yl,a,, UD,a') conditional on Xa, = x. We assume (A-7) holds and discuss invariance further in Appendix B.
For the widely used Benthamite social welfare criterion V(Y), comparing policies using mean outcomes and considering the effect for individuals with a given level of X = x, we obtain the policy relevant treatment effect (PRTE) denoted APRTE(X):
(6) E(V(Ya)IX = x) - E(V(Ya,)IX = x)
=OIa~T(x UD){FpI,tX(UDIX) - FPaIX(UDlx))} duD,
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

686 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
twiohnearleoFnpXex=('lxx,) raenspdecFtpiveaexly(l,|xd)efairneedthfeorditshteridbiufftieorne AMTE = E(V(Yi,a) - V(Yo,a)|IUD,a = u, Xa = x).24'25 T in Appendix B under the assumption that the policy d
distribution of outcomes. To simplify the notation, thr paper, we assume that V(Y) = Y. Modifications of our general case are straightforward.
Define AP(x) = E(PaIX = x) - E(Pa,IX = x), the cha tion of people induced into the program due to the in
AP(x) is positive, we may define per person affected w (FPlx(UDIX) - Fpe, x(uDIx))/(AP(x)). These are the w ble IB. As demonstrated in the next section, in ge weights AMTE differently than either the convention (AATE or ATT) or the policy relevant parameters, and s parameters.
Instead of hoping that conventional treatment param timators answer interesting economic questions, one this paper is to estimate AMTE and weight it by the a mined by how the policy changes the distribution of P alternative approach produces a policy weighted instru by standard instrumental variables. We develop both section. Before doing so, we first consider what conve conditions for identifying AMTE. We also consider ma
4. INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES, LOCAL INSTRUMENTA
AND MATCHING
In this section, we use AMTE to organize the literature on econo uation estimators. We assume (A-7), but for simplicity suppress subscripts. We focus primarily on instrumental variable estimat briefly consider the method of matching. We present the me instrumental variables. Well established intuitions about instrumental variable identification strategies break down when AMTE is nonconstant in uD
24We could define policy invariance for AMTE in terms of expectations of V(Yi,a) and V(Yo,,). 25If we assume that the marginal distributions of X, and Xa, are the same as the marginal distribution of a benchmark X, the weights can be integrated against the distribution of X to obtain the total effect of the policy in the population:
E(V(Y,)) - E(V(Y0,))
= Ex E(V(Y,,)IX) - E(V(Ya,)IX)}
f= f AMTE(, UD){Fp x(UD X) - FpX x(uDlx)} duD dFx(x).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 687
given X. Two sets of instrumental variable conditions a rent literature for this more general case: those assoc instrumental variable assumptions which are implied by selection on heterogenous gains" and those which perm geneous gains. Neither set implies the other, nor does ei relevant treatment effect in the general case. Each set different treatment parameters.
In place of standard instrumental variables methods, proach to estimating policy impacts by estimating AMTE u variables (LIV) to identify all of the treatment para tor AMTE. The AMTE can be weighted in different ways to icy questions. For certain classes of policy intervention AMTE possesses an invariance property analogous to th
of traditional structural econometrics.
We also consider whether it is possible to construct an instrument such that instrumental variables directly estimate APRTE. We establish necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of such an instrument. We also address the inverse question of whether instrumental variable estimators always answer well-posed policy questions. In general, they do not. We present necessary and sufficient conditions for a particular instrument to answer some policy counterfactual and characterize what question is answered when an answer exists.
4.1. Conventional Instrumental Variables
In the general case with AMTE(X, UD) nonconstant in UD, linear IV does not estimate any of the treatment effects previously defined. Let J(Z) denote an instrument written as a function of Z. We sometimes denote J(Z) by J, leaving implicit that J is a function of Z. The standard conditions
Jst(rZu)m,1en(tUa1l ,vUaroi)abalneds uCsoinvg(JJ(Z(Z),) Das) t-h0e idnostnroutm, ebnyt wthilelmidseenlvteifsy, icmonpvlyentthioantalino-r policy relevant treatment effects. We must supplement the standard conditions to identify interpretable parameters. To link our analysis to conventional analyses of IV, we invoke familiar-looking representations of additive separability of outcomes in terms of (U1, U0) so YI = p (X) + U1 and Yo = /o(X) + U0, but
this is not strictly required. All derivations and results in this section hold with-
out any additive separability assumption if I(x) and t0o(x) are replaced by E(Y1IX = x) and E(YoJX = x), respectively, and U1 and Uo are replaced by Yj - E(Y1IX) and Yo - E(YolX), respectively.
Two distinct sets of instrumental variable conditions in the literature are
those due to Heckman and Robb (1985, 1986) and Heckman (1997), and those due to Imbens and Angrist (1994). In the case where AMTE is nonconstant in UD, linear IV estimates different parameters depending on which assumptions are maintained. To establish this point, it is useful to briefly
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

688 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
review the IV method in the case of a common treatment effect defined conditional on X, where Y1 - Yo = A, with A a deterministic function of X, and where additive separability in outcomes is assumed, as in conventional mod-
els. Using (la) and (ib) with U1 = Uo = U, and assuming E(UIX) = 0, we may write Y = ,-Lo(X) + DA + U, where A = pl(X) - ,to(X). By the law of iterated expectations, E(UIX) = 0 and Z IL UIX imply E(UJ(Z)IX) = 0. The standard instrumental variables intuition is that when E(UJIX) = 0 and Cov(J, DIX) O, linear IV identifies A:
Cov(J, Y(X) Cov(J, DAIX) Cov(J, DIX)
(ICoV v(J, D)IX) Co= v(J, A DIX) Cov(J, DIX)
= A = ,cI(X) - wo(X),
where the second equality follows from the assumption that A is a deter function of X. This intuition breaks down in the heterogeneous respo where the outcomes are generated by different unobservables (Uo0 : U Y = -to(X) + DA + Uo, where A = -k (X) - /to(X) + U1 - Uo. This is a va response model.
There are two important cases of the variable response model. The fir arises when responses are heterogeneous, but conditional on X: people base their participation on these responses. In this case, the following co
holds:
(C-1) D AL AIX == E(AIX, UD) = E(AIX), AMTE(x, lID) is constant
and AMTE = AATE = ATT _ ALATE.
The second case arises when the following condition holds:
(C-2) D 1 AIX and E(AIX, UD)) E(AIX).
In this case AMTE is nonconstant and the treatment parameters differ each other.
Application of the standard IV equation to the general variable coefficient model produces the first equality in IV above. Now, however, A is not a deterministic function of X and thus we cannot simply take A outside of the
cUo1va-rUiaon,cewteeorbmtaains in the third term of (IV). Plugging in A = pl(X) - 10o(X) +
Cov(J, DAIX) Cov(J, D(U1 - Uo)IX)
Cov(J,=D1II(X X))- CEtoov (X()J+, DIX)
Our independence assumptions imply that J is in ditional on X, but do not imply that J is unc conditional on X. Thus, in general, the covariance second term is not zero. Knowledge of (X, Z, D) an dencies is not enough to determine the covariance to know joint (X, Z, D, U0, U1) dependencies.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 689
A sufficient condition for producing (C-1) is the strong in tion that decisions to participate in the program are not m of U1 - Uo:
(I-1) Pr(D = lZ, X, U1 - Uo) = Pr(D = 1iZ, X).
Given our assumption that (U1 - Uo) is independent of Z given X, one can use Bayes' theorem to show that (I-1) implies the weaker mean independence condition:
(1-2) E(U1 - Uo0Z, X, D = 1) = E(U1 - UoIX, D = 1)
which is generically necessary and sufficient for linear IV to identify
A'T and AATE
Case (C-2) is inconsistent with (1-2). IV estimates ALATE under the conditions of Imbens and Angrist (1994). ALATE, selection models, and LIV, introduced below, analyze the more general case covered by (C-2). Different assumptions define different parameters. In addition, as we establish in Section 4.3, even under the same assumptions, different instruments define different parameters and traditional intuitions about instrumental variables break down.

4.2. Estimating the MTE Using Local Instrumental Variables
Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2001a) resolve this confusion using the local instrumental variable estimator to recover AMTE pointwise. Conditional on X = x, LIV is the derivative of the conditional expectation of Y with respect to P(Z) = p:

(7)

ALL(Ix(X,, pP))

=E(

YX

= x,
Sp

P(Z)

=

p)

The expectation E(Y1 - YoIX, P(Z)) exists (almost everywhere) by assumption (A-4), and E(YIX, P(Z)) can be recovered over the support of (X, P(Z)). Assumptions (A-2)-(A-4) jointly allow one to use Lebesgue's theorem for the
derivative of an integral to show that E(Y1 - YolX = x, P(Z) = p) is differentiable in p. Thus we can recover 'E(YIX = x, P(Z) = p) for almost all p that
are limit points of the support of distribution of P(Z) conditional on X = x.26 Under our assumptions, LIV identifies MTE for all limit points in the support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X. This expression does not require additive separability of pcti(X, U1) or pto(X, U0).27

"26For example, if the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X has a density with respect to Lebesgue measure, then all points in the support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X
are limit points of that support and we can identify ALIV(x, p) = (8E(YIX = x, P(Z) = p))/rp for p (almost everywhere).
27Note, however, it does require our model and assumptions, including the assumption of additive separability between UD and Z in the latent index, for selection into treatment. See the discussion in Section 6.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

690 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL

Under standard regularity conditions, a variety of n can be used to estimate the derivative of E(YIX, P(Z mate AMTE. With AMTE in hand, if the support of th conditional on X is the full unit interval, one can gene parameters defined in Section 2 as well as the policy re meter presented in Section 3 as weighted versions of A of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X is not full identify some parameters. For example, Heckman and that to identify ATE under our assumptions, it is neces the support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional Thus, identification of ATE does not require that t conditional on X be the full unit interval or that the d
ditional on X contain any limit points. Sharp bounds o meters can be constructed under the same assumption without imposing full support conditions. The resulting easy to apply compared with those presented in the pre
To establish the relationship between LIV and ordi and to motivate how LIV identifies AMTE, notice from
the conditional expectation of Y given P(Z) is

E(YIP(Z) = p) = E(YoP(Z) = p) + E(AlP(Z) =
where we keep the conditioning on X implicit. Our independence assumption (A-2) imply

E(YIP(Z) = p) = E(Yo) + E(Ajp > UD)p.
Applying the IV or Wald estimator for two different v for p : p', we obtain

(8)

E(YIP(Z) = p) - E(YIP(Z) = p')

p- p

ATE E(U - Uolp UD)p -E(U1 - Uolp' UD)p
p - p'

where the expression is obtained under the assumption of additive separability in the outcomes so (la) and (Ib) apply. Note that exactly the same equation holds without additive separability if one replaces U1 and U0 with Y1 - E( Y IX) and Yo - E( Yo1X).

2"For example, see Heckman and Vytlacil (2001b) for a comparison of sharp bounds under the nonparametric selection model with the Manski (1990) sharp bounds under a weaker mean independence condition. Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) survey and synthesize this literature and Heckman and Vytlacil (2001a) develop the bounds.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 691
When U1 - U0 or (U1 - Uo) AL UD (case (C-1)), IV bas mates AATE because the second term on the right-hand si sion (8) vanishes. Otherwise, IV estimates a difficult-to-inte of MTE parameters which we analyze further below.
Another representation of E(YIP(Z) = p) that reveals th under additive separability more explicitly writes (keeping on X implicit) that
(9) E(YIP(Z) = p) = E(Yo) + AATEp + f E(UI - UOIU
We can differentiate with respect to p and use LIV to identi
8E(YdIp P(Z) = p) = ZATE + E(U1 - UoIUD = P) = M
Notice that IV estimates AATE when E(YIP(Z) = p) is a linear function of p. Thus a test of the linearity of E(YIP(Z) = p) in p is a test of the validity of linear IV for AATE, i.e., it is a test of whether or not the data are consistent with a correlated random coefficient model. The nonlinearity of E(YIP(Z) = p) in p provides a way to distinguish whether case (C-1) or case (C-2) describes the data. It is also a test of whether or not agents can at least partially anticipate future unobserved (by the econometrician) gains (the Y1 - Yo given X) at the time they make their participation decisions. This analysis generalizes to the nonseparable outcomes case. We use separability in outcomes only to simplify the exposition and link to more traditional models. In particular, exactly the same expression holds with exactly the same derivation for the nonseparable
tciavseelyif.29we replace U1 and U0 with Yl - E(Y1IX) and Yo - E(YolX), respecFigure 2A plots two cases of E(YIP(Z) = p) based on the generalized Roy
model used to generate the example in Figures 1A and lB. When AMTE does not depend on uD, the expectation is a straight line. Figure 2B plots the derivatives of the two curves in Figure 2A. When AMTE depends on uD, people sort into the program being studied positively on the basis of gains from the program, and one gets the curved line depicted in Figure 2A. The levels and derivatives of E(YIP(Z) = p) and standard errors can be estimated using a variety of semiparametric methods. The derivative estimator of AMTE is the local instrumental variable estimator of Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2001a). Thus it is possible to test condition (C-l) using simple econometric methods.
29Making the conditioning on X explicit, we obtain that E(YIX = x, P(Z) = p) = E( YoX = x) + AATE(x)p fop E(U1 - UoIX = x, Ud = UD) dUD, with the derivative with respect to p given by AMTE(x, p).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

692 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL

25

I

.

E[YIP(Z)=p E[YIP(Z)=p

20

---

,15
10

p
FIGURE 2A.-Plot of the E(YIP(Z) =
In the case without regressors, X, the nu linearity.30
4.3. What Does Linear IV Estimate? It is instructive to consider what linear IV estimates when AMTE is noncon-
stant and conditions (A-1)-(A-5) hold. We consider the general nonseparable case. We consider instrumental variables conditional on X = x using a general function of Z as an instrument and then specialize our result using P(Z) as the instrument. Let J(Z) be any function of Z such that Cov(J(Z), DIX = x) = 0.
Define
Piv(X; J) - [Cov(J(Z), YIX = x)]/[Cov(J(Z), DIX = x)].
30Thus, one can apply any one of the large number of available tests for a parametric null versus a nonparametric alternative (see, e.g., Ellison and Ellison (2000), Zheng (1996)). With regressors, the null is nonparametric, leaving E(YIX = x, P(Z) = p) unspecified except for restrictions on the partial derivatives with respect to p. In this case, the formal test is a test of a nonparametric null versus a nonparametric alternative, and a formal test of the null hypothesis can be implemented using the methodology of Chen and Fan (1999).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 693

0.4
0.35

1

.

,

MTEAgen MTEAgen

0.3

0.25 -

- 0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 UD
FIGURE 2B.-Plot of the identified marginal treatment effect from Figure 2A (the derivative). Note: Parameters for the general heterogeneous case are the same as those used in Figures 1A and 1B. For the homogeneous case we impose U1 = Uo (o-1 = ao = 0.012).

Appendix B derives an expression for the numerator of this expression, using
(1c) and (A-2) and letting J(Z) - J(Z) - E(J(Z)IX): (10) Cov(J(Z), YIX)
=I AMT(X, uD)E(J(Z)IX, P(Z) > UD) Pr(P(Z) > uDIX) duD
The denominator follows by a similar argument. By iterated expectati Cov(J(Z), DIX) = Cov(J(Z), P(Z)IX). Thus
iv(x; J) =f AMTE(x, UD)hIv(UDIX; J) dUD,
where
E(J(Z)IX = x, P(Z) > uD) Pr(P(Z) > UDIX = x) Cov(J(Z), P(Z)IX = x)

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

694 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
assuming the standard rank condition Cov(J(Z), P
weights integrate to unity,
f hiv(uDjIx; J) duD 1
and can be constructed from the data on X, P(Z), J(Z), and D. Assumptions about the properties of the weights are testable.31
We first discuss additional properties of the weights for the special case where J(Z) = P(Z) (the propensity score is the instrument), and then analyze the properties of the weights for a general instrument J(Z). From Equation (11),
hiv(uDIx; P(Z)) [E(P(Z)IX = x, P(Z) > uD) - E(P(Z)IX = x)] Var(P(Z)IX = x) x Pr(P(Z) > UD IX = x).
Figure 1B plots the IV weight for J(Z) = P(Z) and the MTE for our generalized Roy model example (see also Table IB). Let pMin and pM" denote the minimum and maximum points in the support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X = x. The weights on MTE corresponding to the use of P(Z) as the instrument are nonnegative for all evaluation points, are strictly positive
for UD (pMiin, pMax), and are zero for uD < p'Min and for uD > pMax 32 Our expression for the weights does not impose any support conditions on
the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X, and thus does not require that P(Z) be either continuous or discrete. To demonstrate this, consider two extreme special cases: (i) when P(Z) is a continuous random variable and (ii) when P(Z) is a discrete random variable.
31Expressions for IV and OLS as weighted averages of marginal response functions, and the properties and construction of the weights were first derived by Yitzhaki in 1989 in a paper that was eventually published in 1996 (see Yitzhaki (1996)). He does not use the MTE, however.
32For UD evaluation points between pMin and pMx, uD e (pin, pMa), we have that
E(P(Z)IP(Z) > uD, X = x) > E(P(Z)IX = x) and Pr(P(Z) > uDIX = X) > 0,
so that hIv(uDIx; P(Z)) > 0 for any uD E (pM= , in,Max). For uD < pMiin
E(P(Z)IP(Z) > UD, X = x) = E(P(Z)JX = x). For any uD > pM"a, Pr(P(Z) > uDIX = x) = 0. Thus, hiv(uDIx; P(Z)) = 0 for any UD < pMin
and for any uD > pMax, hlv(uDIx; P(Z)) is strictly positive for uD c (PM"i, pM), and is zero for all UD < PMin and all uD > pMax. Whether the weights are nonzero at the endpoints depends on the distribution of P(Z). However, since the weights are defined for integration with respect to Lebesgue measure, the value taken by the weights at pMin and pMax does not affect the value of the integral.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 695
First consider the case where the distribution of P(Z has a density with respect to Lebesgue measure with non the interval (pmi, Pxax). In this case, ALIV(X, U) is well d (pxin, PMa) such that hIv(uDIx; P(Z)) > 0. Using the fact AMTE(x, UD) at evaluation points where LIV is well defined expression for the IV estimator as
Max PX
/irv(x; P(ZJ))in = I ALIV(, UD)hIv(UDIx; P(Z)) dUD.33
Next consider the case where the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X has density with respect to counting measure. For simplicity, assume that the support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X contains a finite number of values, {Pl, ..., PK with pl< <P2< ... < PK. Then E(P(Z)IX = x, P(Z) > UD) is constant in UD for UD within any (pj,pj+,) interval, and Pr(P(Z) > UD) is constant in UD for UD within any (pj, pj?I) interval, and thus hlv(uDIx; P(Z)) is constant in uD over any (pj, pj+,) interval. Let qj denote the value taken by hIv(uDIx; P(Z)) for UD E (pj, pj + 1). Then, letting qj = qj(pj+1 - pj),
/3v(x; P(Z))
Sf E(AIX = x, UD = UD)hlv(UDIX; P(Z)) duD
K-1f Pj+1
K-1 Pj+1
= qj(pj+i - pj) E(AIX =x, UD UD) du j=1 P j+ j K-1
= LATE(x, Pj,j+l)qj*34 j=1
The properties of the weights for general J(Z) depend critically on the re-
lationship between J(Z) and P(Z). Defining T(plx; J) = E(JIP(Z) = p, X = x) - E(JIX = x),
J, (T(t x; J) dFpIx(t x) Cov(J, PIX = x)
33Angrist, Graddy, and Imbens (2000) develop a special case of this expression for a scalar
instrument.
34In this special case, our analysis is a latent variable version of the formula in Imbens and Angrist (1994).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

696 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
From this expression, we learn that the IV estimator ment satisfies the following properties:
(i) Two instruments J and J* weight MTE equal tion points if and only if E(JIX = x, P(Z) = p) x, P(Z) = p) - E(J*IX = x) for all p in the support o P(Z) conditional on X = x.
(ii) The support of hiv(uDlx; J) is contained in (pMin hiv(tlx; J) = 0 for t < pMin and for t > pMax. Using any P(Z) leads to nonzero weights only on a subset of (M, i propensity score as an instrument leads to nonnegativ range of evaluation points than using any other instrum
(iii) For all UD, hIv(uDIX; J) is nonnegative if E(J weakly monotonic in p. Using J as an instrument yiel on ZAMTE if E(JIX = x, P(Z) > p) is weakly monoton is satisfied when J(Z) = P(Z). More generally, if J is of P(Z), then using J as the instrument will lead t on AMTE. There is no guarantee that the weights for nonnegative for all uD, although the weights integrate be positive over some range of evaluation points. We p where the instrument leads to negative weights for som
The propensity score plays a central role in determinin weights. The IV weighting formula critically depends on the relationship between the instrument J(Z) and th example, whether two instruments provide the same w on their relationship with P(Z) (item (i) above), the pos weights depends on the support of P(Z) (item (ii)), and w will provide positive weights on MTE depends on the in
with P(Z) (item (iii)). The interpretation placed on the IV estimand depend
of P(Z) even if only Z1 (e.g., a coordinate of Z) is used a drives home the point about the difference between IV and IV in the more general model with heterogeneous this paper. In the traditional model, the choice of any the specification of instruments in P(Z) not used to co estimator does not affect the IV estimand. In the more in this paper, these choices matter. Two economists, us will obtain the same IV point estimate, but the interp estimate will depend on the specification of the Z not used as an instrument. The weights can be positive negative for another.
Table II gives the IV estimand for the generalized Roy ate Figures 1A and 1B using P(Z) as the instrument. Th D = 1[P3'Z > V] is given at the base of Figure 1B (Z i normal, UD = I(V/crEov)). We compare the IV estimand evant treatment effect for a policy defined at the bas
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 697

0.06 I I 0.05
0.04 -

- MTE --h IV(Z)
hvOLS
h PRTE

0.03 -

uj 0.02
CU 0.01 % ft oo_

-0.01

-0.04

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 06 0.7 0.8 0.9
UD

FIGURE 3A.-Marginal treatment effect vs. linear instrumental variables, ordinary least squares, and policy relevant treatment effect weights when P(Z) is the instrument for the policy given at the base of Table II.

persons get a bonus Zt. Their decision rule for Z > 0 is D = 1[Z(1 + t) > V]. People are not forced into participation in the program. Given the assumed distribution of Z, and the other parameters of the model, we obtain hPRTE(UD) as plotted in Figures 3A-3C (the scales differ across the graphs). We use the per capita PRTE and consider three instruments. Table III presents estimands for three instruments in the generalized Roy models for three environments.
The first instrument we consider is P(Z), which ignores the policy (t) effect on choices. It is estimated on a sample with no policy in place. Its weight is plotted in Figure 3A, which also displays the OLS weight (discussed later).

TABLE III
LINEAR INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE ESTIMANDS AND THE POLICY RELEVANT TREATMENT EFFECT
Using propensity score P(Z) as the instrument 0.2013 Using propensity score P(Z(1 + t(1i[Z > 0]))) as the instrument 0.1859 Using a dummy B as an instrumenta 0.1549 Policy relevant treatment effect (PRTE) 0.1549
aThe dummy B is such that B = 1 if an individual belongs to a randomly wise.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

698 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL

0.041
0.035 h
0.03

- MTE
V()hIv(P(z.t)) h PRTE

0.025

u

0.02

IOf

-U 0.015 -

-

0.01 0.005

0.05. -.

-0.01

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 UD

FIGURE 3B.-Marginal treatment effect vs. linear IV with Z as an instrument, linear IV with P(Z(1 + t(1[Z > 0]))) = P(Z, t) as an instrument, and policy relevant treatment effect weights for the policy defined at the base of Table II.

The IV weights for P(Z) and the weights for APRTE differ. This is as it should be because APRTE is making a comparison across regimes but IV in this case is making a comparison within a no-policy regime. Given the shape of AMTE(uD), it is not surprising that the estimand for IV based on P(Z) is so much above the APRTE, which weights a lower valued segment of AMTE(UD) more heavily.
The second instrument we consider exploits the variation induced by the policy in place and fits it on samples where the policy is in place. On intuitive grounds, this instrument might be thought to work well for identifying the PRTE, but in fact it does not. The instrument is P(Z, t) = P(Z(1 + tl[Z > 0])), which jumps in value when Z > 0. This is the choice probability in the regime with the policy in place. Figure 3B plots the weight for this IV along with the weight for P(Z) as an IV (repeated from Figure 3A). While this weight looks a bit more like the weight for APRTE, it is clearly different.
Figure 3C plots the weight for an ideal instrument for PRTE: a randomization of eligibility. This compares the outcomes in a population with the policy in place with outcomes where it is not. We use an instrument B such that
B= 1, if0,a poetrhsoenriws ieslieg.ible to participate in the program,

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 699

0.04
0.035--

- MTE
Iv(B)
h.PRTE

0.03 ,-' 1
0.025

wu 0.02 -
0.015 -
0.01

0
0.005o -

I

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 UD
FIGURE 3C.-Marginal treatment effect vs. IV policy and policy relevant treatment effect weights for the policy defined at the base of Table II.
Persons for whom B = 1 make their participation choices under the policy with a jump in Z, tl(Z > 0) in their choice sets. If B = 0, persons are embargoed from the policy and there is no bonus. This is a prepolicy regime. We assume Pr[B = 11Yo0, Y1, V, Z] = Pr[B = 1] = 0.5, so all persons are equally likely to receive or not receive eligibility for the bonus and assignment does not depend on model unobservables in the outcome equation. The Wald estimator in this
case is
E(YIB = 1) - E(YIB = 0) Pr(D = 1iB = 1) - Pr(D = 1IB = 0)
The IV weight for this estimator is a special case of Equation (11):
hiv(uDIB) - E(B - E(B)IP(Z) > uD) Pr(P(Z) > UD)
Cov(B, P(Z))
where P(Z) = P(Z(1 + tl[Z > 0]))BP(Z)(1-B). Here, the IV is eligibility for a policy and IV is equivalent to a social experiment that identifies the mean gain per participant who switches to participation in the program. It is to be
expected that this IV weight and hpRTE are identical.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

700 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
Monotonicity
Monotonicity property (iii) is strong. For a general J(Z), there is no guarantee that it will be satisfied even if J(Z) is independent of (Yo, YI) given X and if J(Z) is correlated with D given X = x so that standard IV conditions are satisfied. Thus if Z is a K-dimensional vector and J(Z) = Z1, even if conditional on Z2 = z2, ..., ZK = ZK, P(Z) is monotonic in Z1, there is no guarantee that Z1 used as an instrument for D has positive weights on the MTE.
If we redefine IV for Z1 to be conditional on Z2 = Z2,..., ZK = ZK, the weights are positive. Conditioning on instruments not used to form the primary covariance relationship is a new concept that does not appear in the conventional IV literature. In conventional cases governed by condition (C-1), any valid instrument identifies the same parameter. In the general case analyzed in this paper, different choices of instruments and the conditioning sets of other Z variables define different parameters.
Figure 4 demonstrates the possibility of negative weights for the model given at its base. In this figure, we use V rather than normalized Fv(V) = UD in order to use familiar normal algebra. This simulation is generated from a classical normal error term selection model with nonnormal instruments. The
instruments are generated as mixtures of normals from two underlying populations. One can think of this example as a two-component ecological model with different J(Z), P(Z) covariance relationships in the two components. An alternative way to say the same thing is that there are different (J(Z), P'Z) covariance relationships in the two subpopulations generating D = 1(p'Z > V). In the first component, the covariance between J(Z) and p'Z is 0.98. In the second, the covariance varies as shown in Table IV, where the IV is Z1 but the choice probability depends on ZI and Z2 (AD(Z) = p'Z). Ceteris paribus, increasing Z1 increases the probability that D = 1. Symmetrically, increasing Z2 and holding Z1 constant also increases this probability. Yet, since Z, and Z2 covary, varying Z, implicitly varies Z2, which may offset the ceteris paribus effect of Z1 and produce nonmonotonicity and negative weights. In this example there are different covariance relationships in different normal subcomponents of the data. As Z1 increases, P(Z) increases for some people and decreases for other people, leading to two-way flows into and out of treatment for different people. IV estimates the effect of Z1 on outcomes not controlling for the other elements of Z. For the configuration of parameters shown there (and for numerous other configurations), the IV weight is negative over a substantial range of values.
The negativity of the weights over certain regions exhibited in Figure 4 makes it clear that ZI (and more generally J(Z)) fails the monotonicity condition (iii) and does not estimate a gross treatment effect. Some agents withdraw from participation in the program when Z1 is raised (not holding constant Z2), while others enter, even though ceteris paribus a higher Z1 raises participation (D). Thus the widely held view that IV estimates some treatment effect of a change in D induced by a change in Z1 is in general false. It estimates a
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 701

0.07
0

.06-

h
h

0.05

0.04-

0.03
?+
0.02

++
+ + + +
-++

0.01 -

-0.01

4

3

2

1

0 V

1

2

3

4

ModFeIlGuUseRdEto4.-gIeVnewraetieghFitgsuwreh4e:n Z - piN( l, l) + p2N(AL2, X2) for different values of 2* Y1 = Y + a + U1 U1 = o1 e, e " N(0, 1),
Yo = y + Uo U0 = 0oe, o1 = 0.012, ro = -0.05, rv = -1,
I = f'Z - V, V= ve, y = 0.67, a =0.2,

D= 1, if I > 0, 0, if/I<0,

Z ~ piN(-t1, X1) + p2N(,A2, 92),
1 0.5 1.4
A l [0 - 1 ], 2 = [0 1_X1 [1.4= 0.5 1 4 p1=0.45, P2=0.55, 0=[0.2 1.4],
Cov(Z1, P'Z) = fP'I = 0.98 (Group 1),

TE [ Cov(U1 - Uo, V) 1

AMTE(v) = a + ,Var(V) ,

hlv(v) =

E(Z11fp'Z > v) Pr(P3'Z > v)fv(v) Cov(Z1, D)

av = j AMTE(v)hIv(v) dv.

net effect and not a treatment effect, because monotonicity may be violated. Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil (2004) present stark examples where MTE is

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

702 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL

TABLE IV
THE IV ESTIMATOR AND Cov(ZI, 3'Z) ASSOCIATED WITH EACH VALUE OF 12 (GROUP 2 COVARIANCE)

Weights 12 IV Cov(Z1, P'Z) = 3' 2
hi[ 0.6 -0.3 [-0.3 0.6 0.133 -0.30
h20.6 0.1 0.177 -0.02
h2 -0.1 0.6

h3 [0.6 0.1]
.0.1 0.6
Weights for mixture of normals IV:

0.194

0.26

hiv(vh) -=V (3 )i13)1l/2 eCXxPp[ 2 1-2 2( i /+3)1 e(+x3P23)12/2 02(/3x2/[3()l1-/22

where 11 and .1 are (t'he1fi/rs2t roewxs pof+I'12a1nd2Y2,1re)s1pe/ct2ive)ly.2Cle(a2r/ly,3h+lV(2-oc))1=/0 2andexhIVp(oc2) 3= +0.2T/he2w
clearly integrate to 1 over the support of V = (-oc, oo). Observe that if P2 = 0, the weights must be positive. Thus structure of the covariances of the instruments is a key determinant of the positivity of the weights for any instr It has nothing to do with the ceteris paribus effect of Z1 on P(Z) in the general case (changing Z1 holding al
components of Z fixed). Now observe that a necessary condition for hlv < 0 is that sign(p3'j) = - sign(P3 that the covariance between Z1 and p'Z be of opposite signs in the two populations. Without loss of gen
assume that P'5" > 0. If it equals zero, we fail the rank condition. fv(v) is the density of V.

negative, the weights are negative, and instrumental variable estimates of t ment effects are positive. Table IV shows how the IV estimand changes w the weights even though the treatment parameters are the same in all t examples.
Monotonicity condition (iii) is testable. Whether condition (iii) corresp to positive weights on MTE depends on whether all of our assumptions h particularly (A-2) and representation (3). If the weights are negative, change in J(Z) induces two-way flows into and out of treatment. Since it is sible to estimate the joint density of (J(Z), P(Z)) given X nonparametrica under our assumptions it is possible to test for the positivity of the we which under our assumptions is also a test for monotonicity condition (i However (A-2) itself is not testable. Monotonicity condition (iii) is dis from the condition termed "monotonicity" by Imbens and Angrist (1994).
discuss their condition in Section 6.

4.4. Policy Relevant Instrumental Variables
We have just analyzed what IV estimates in terms of weighting MTE. Instead of picking an instrument and hoping that it estimates something interesting, it is more natural to define an economically interesting parameter and see if in-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 703
strumental variables identify it. Suppose that there is a pa weighted average of AMTE conditional on X = x. Can we c of Z to use as an ordinary instrument so that the resulti sponds to the desired weighted average of AMTE? This qu interesting if the estimand is a policy counterfactual. We there is any policy counterfactual estimated by a given ins consider the case where P(Z) is a continuous random varia the end of this section to consider the case where the di
discrete.
Suppose that we seek to recover a parameter defined by f AMTE(X, U) X w(uIx) du by the method of linear instrumental variables. We know from Equation (12) the form of the weights corresponding to the IV estimator for any particular instrument J(Z). We seek an instrument J(Z) that has associated weights on MTE given by Equation (12) that are the same as those on the desired parameter
w(uDIXf/1)=T(tUlx;DJ) dhFpiivx((tulx)DIX, J).
Cov(J, PIX = x)
Assuming that Fpix has a density with respect to Lebesgue measure, t ond term in this expression is differentiable in u (almost everywhere). ing that W(UD X) is also differentiable at all points of evaluation, it f
that
T(UDIX; J)fP x(uDlx) Cov(J, PIX = x)
The following proposition provides conditions under which an instrument exists with the desired properties.
PROPOSITION 1: Under the conditions (i) Fpx (') has a density with respect to Lebesgue measure, (ii) w(-|x) satisfies the properties W(UDIx) differentiable in UD for all UD
[0, 1], fo W(UDIx) dUD = 1, and w(llx) = w(0lx) = 0, (iii) fplx (t Ix) = 0 implies w'(t lx) = 0,
there exists an instrument J,(Z) such that Cov(Jx, DIX = x) 0 0 and W(uDIX) = hiv( uD Ix, J). An instrument that satisfies these conditions is35
I w'(P(Z)Ix) if fpix(P(Z)lx) > 0, Ji(Z) = fpix(P(Z)Ix)'
0, if fpix(P(Z)lx) = 0.36
35When such an instrument exists, it will not be unique, since the IV estimand will be in to rescaling or location shifts for the instrument.
36Note that fp1x(P(Z)lx) > 0 with probability 1 so that Jx(Z) = w'(P(Z)lx)/fpi
with probability 1.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

704 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
Under (i), conditions (ii) and (iii) are necessary and sufficien such an instrument.
PROOF: See Appendix C.
Condition (i) is a regularity condition requiring that random variable. We examine the case where P(Z) is this section. Condition (ii) requires that the desired wei weights in the sense of integrating up to 1, and also that t regularity conditions that the weights are differentiab are zero when evaluated at the uD values of 0 and 1. Th these conditions mimic the properties of any IV weight tion mimics the property of any IV weights when the in Condition (iii) is a strong, but natural, condition. It re of the propensity score includes the support of w'(.Ix) the propensity score has to be positive at any evaluation nonzero. This condition will always be satisfied if fprx(t Given (i), if (ii) or (iii) fails, then no instrument exists t weights. If the desired weights do not integrate to 1 or then as long as P(Z) is continuous (has a distribution th tinuous with respect to Lebesgue measure), there will no that provides the desired weights. If the weights are no val outside of the support of the propensity score, then be constructed that would provide the desired weights.
One implication of Proposition 1 is that if P(Z) is MTE depends on uD in a nontrivial way, there does no that provides the weights corresponding to ATE or TT. the weights for ATE and TT do not satisfy w(llx) = weights for ATE and TT do not satisfy condition (ii) of under assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) and under the additiona proposition, no instrument exists that gives the weight is a continuous random variable. This statement leaves whether instruments will exist that answer policy count cialize the previous proposition for the special case of po notation for policy counterfactuals from Section 3.
PROPOSITION 2: Assume the following:
(i) Fp x(-), FPa,,X(-), and Fpilx(-) have densities with measure, where P is the initial (benchmark) probability probabilities associated with two policies (possibly) distin policy.
(ii) E(P, IX = x) # E(Pa, IX = x). (iii) For any t, fprix(tlx) = 0 implies fpr1x(tlx) - fp,, x(tIx) = 0.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 705
Define Jx to be a policy relevant instrument if it satisfies Cov and
f T(tIx; Jx) dFpx(tIx) hiv(uDx, Jx)C=ov(Jx, PIX = x)
Fpax(tJx) - Fpalx(tlx) E(PaIX = x) - E(PaIX = x)
Given conditions (i) and (ii), condition (iii) is necessary and sufficient for the existence of such an instrument. If the instrument exists, it can be constructed as37
I fpalx(P(Z)lx) - fpaix(P(Z)Ix)
Jx((Z) 0=,fpif1x(fPp (Zx)1(xP) (Z)lx) = 0.38
PROOF: The proof follows by verifying the cond
Appendix C. Q.E.D.
Condition (i) requires th variable in a benchmark tion (ii) requires that the regime a is different than the requirement that the only differ at evaluation score. If (iii) fails, then no
An immediate corollary score as the instrument r
(13) P(Z) = a(X) + 13(X)[ fpa'x(P(Z))f-pIfIpx, x((Pj (ZZ))))]
where a(X) = E(P(Z)IX) and P(X) = -Var(P(Z)IX), i.e., only if th
propensity score is linear in {fp,j x(P(Z)) - fPaix(P(Z))1/fpix(P(Z)). A related question asks whether, given an instrument, there exists a polic
counterfactual such that the given instrument is the policy relevant instrume for that counterfactual. We investigate this question for policy counterfactua starting from a benchmark distribution of P(Z) (the benchmark policy is a, s Pa(Za) = P(Z)) to some new policy characterized by Pa,(Za,). We first answer
371f such a Jx(Z) exists, then any linear function of Jx(Z) will also produce the desired set o weights.
38Note that fplx(P(Z)lx) > 0 with probability 1 so that Jx(Z)= (fpa, i(P(Z)jx) fpex(P(Z) x))/(fpx (P(Z)Ix) with probability 1.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

706 J.J. JHECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
the question for the special case where the propensity s iSnoslvtrinugmfenort ffopraoaI pxo(Pli(cZy)) cinha(r1a3c)t,etrhizeedprboypensity score wi

(14) kfPx(UD) = fVPaxr(P((U Z) XD) )(1 UD - E(P(Z)IX)

uIfsifnPg,,tIhxegpivreonpebnysitEyqusactoiroen d(i1r4e)citslya epsrtoim peartedetnhseiteyf,fetchtenofinasptorluim cyeninttael rvvaerniatbiolnes that changes the density of the propensity score from fplx to fp, lx, where
ftoPa1olaxndisbgeinvoennnbeygatEiqvueaftoiornal(l14ev).alTuoatbioenapporinotpse.rfpd,enlxsi(t.y) i,nftPega,rlaxtems tuost1.i3n9tegrate
HuDen-ceE,(Pf(pZ)dIaX,)x(<.)Vwaril(lP(bZe))nfoonrnaelgl aUtDivesuacnhdtthhatusfPaIXpr(UopDe)r> d0e.nIfsitwye ilfetand only if
pMax denote the maximum of the support of P(Z) conditional on X, we can rewrite this condition as pMax - E(P(Z)IX = x) < Var(P(Z)IX = x). Nothing guarantees that this condition holds, so one cannot guarantee that an instrument produces any policy counterfactual. Not all instruments answer well-posed policy questions.
We next consider the question of whether a general instrument is the policy relevant instrument for some policy. Following the same series of steps used to establish (14), if the instrument J(Z) answers a corresponding policy question, then the policy imposes the restriction that

falx (uD fPIX (U(E)(J(CZ)(oX,vP((ZJ) = ,UD)P- E((ZJ(Z))IIXX)\ )

The implied fpa, (.) integrates to 1. It is nonnegative for all evaluation and only if

E(J(Z)IX, P(Z) = UD) - E(J(Z)IX)

Cov(J, P(Z)IX)

<1

for all UD such that fPx (UD) > 0. If this condition fails, the instrument is not the policy relevant instrument for any policy. Nothing in the structure of the
problem imposes this requirement. The preceding analysis conditions on X. Suppose that we wish to recover
unconditional parameters, e.g., those defined by f[f AMTE(x, U)w(ujx) du] x dFx (x). If the conditions of Proposition 1 hold for X = x (almost everywhere), then one solution would be to construct J,(Z) for each x, estimate the parameter conditional on X for each x, and then average over x values. However,

39f fpix(UD)( - (U - E(P(Z)IX))/(Var(P(Z)IX))) dUD = 1 since fuDfPIX(UD) dUD
E(P(Z)IX).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 707
from the construction of J,(Z), one can use instrumental tional on X with the constructed J(Z) as the instrument t parameter in one step.
PROPOSITION 3: Assume that the conditions of Proposition all X. Construct
J(Z) fpxI(Pwf(rZ'i(xP))(P('Z(iZ)f))IXfp) x(P(Z)) > 0,
O, if fpvx(P(Z)) = 0.40
Then
Cov(J(Z), Y) ff= AMTE(x uD)w(UD Ix) du dFx(x).
PROOF: See Appendix C.
Thus far we have considered the case where P(Z) is a continuous random variable. Is it possible to construct an instrument that produces the desired weights if P(Z) is discrete? The following proposition shows that instrumental variables estimators are only able to produce a very narrow range of weights if P(Z) is discrete. In particular, they only produce weights given by step func-
tions with the jumps in the weight function occurring only at the support points
of P(Z).
PROPOSITION 4: Under the conditions (i) The support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X is a finite set,
{p, ...-, PK} with P1 < 2 < ... < PK and with Pr[P(Z)= pjIX = x] > 0 for each j= 1, . .., K,
(ii) w(.Ix) satisfies the properties fo w(uDIx) du = 1, and w(uDlx) = 0 for uD < Pi and for uD > PK,
(iii) w(uD X) is constant in u over the interval (pi, pj+l] for j = 1, . . . , K; there exists an instrument Jx(Z) such that Cov(Jx, DIX = x) # 0 and
fw) D T(tlx; J) dFpix(tlx) Cov(Jx, PIX = x)
An instrument that satisfies these conditions is
K1
Jx(Z)=E1\(I - wi+i)1[P(Z) = pi],
(Z)= j=P1 r[P(Z) = pplX = x] (w - w )[P(Z) =
40Note that fpix(P(Z) X) > 0 with probability 1 so that J(Z) = w'(P(Z)IX)ifpix(P(Z)IX)
with probability 1.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

708 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
where wj denotes the (constant) value of W(UD IX) over the in
j = 2,..., K - 1 and where w = WK+1 = 0.41 Given cond
(ii) and (iii) are necessary and sufficient for the existence of s
PROOF: See Appendix C.
Thus, if P(Z) is a discrete random variable, only a very lim weights on P(Z) can be captured through proper choice of the class of policies that can be generated by IV is very l our framework to analyze the OLS estimator and the assum imposed in one widely used version of the method of mat
4.5. OLS Weights and Matching
The OLS estimator can also be represented as a weighted The weight is given in Table IB, where U1 and U0 are def from conditional expectations, U1 = Y - E(Y1IX) and Unlike the weights for Arr and AATE, these weights do grate to 1 and they are not necessarily nonnegative. The generalized Roy model are plotted in Figure 1B. The nega the OLS weight leads to a smaller OLS treatment estimate other treatment effects in Table II.
Table II shows the estimated OLS treatment effect for the generalized Roy example. For a binary regressor D, OLS conditional on X identifies
AOLS(X) = E(Y1IX, D = 1) - E(YoIX, D = 0)
= E(Y - Yo0X, D= 1)
+ {E(Yo IX, D = 1) - E(YoIX, D = 0)),
where the term in braces is the "selection bias" term-the difference in pretreatment outcomes between treated and untreated individuals. It is also the bias for AT'. The large negative selection bias in this example is consistent with comparative advantage as emphasized by Roy (1951). People who are good in sector 1 (i.e., treatment) may be very poor in sector 0 (no treatment). The differences among the policy relevant treatment effects, the conventional treatment effects, and the OLS estimand are illustrated in Figure 3A and Tables II and III. As is evident from Table II, it is not at all clear that the instrumental variable estimator, with instruments that satisfy classical properties, performs better than OLS in identifying the policy relevant treatment
effect.
41When such an instrument exists, it will not be unique, since the IV estimand will be invariant to rescaling or location shifts for the instrument.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 709
If there is no selection conditional on covariates, UD E(UIIX, UD) = E(UI0X) = 0 and E(UolX, UD) = E(UoI OLS weights are unity and OLS identifies ATE. OLS is a f Furthermore, UD AL (Y1, Yo)IX implies that AMTE(x, UD UD, i.e., AMTE(X, UD) = AMTE(X, UD) for UD, u' (almost treatment effects are the same. Observe that given the independence in terms of X, we can identify ATE and T a Z that satisfies (A-2). If there is such a Z, the condition dition implies under (A-1)-(A-5) that E(YIX, P(Z) = p conditional independence assumption is invoked in the m and has come into widespread use. The method is base that there is no purposeful selection into the program b (by the econometrician) components of gain.42
One can weaken the assumption that UD iL (Y1, Y0)IX t Y1 and Yo are mean independent of D conditional on X.4 mean independent of Y1, Yo conditional on X without U of Y,, Yo conditional on X only if fortuitous balancing oc positive Y1, Yo dependence on UD and regions of negativ on UD that just exactly offset each other. Such balancing i model and in the generalized Roy model.44'45 We next app analyze policy forecasting problems.
5. OUT OF SAMPLE POLICY FORECASTING, FORECASTING
NEW POLICIES AND STRUCTURAL MODELS BASED ON THE MTE
Section 3 introduced the concept of the Policy Relevant Treatment and invoked a policy invariance assumption. In this section, we present
42See Heckman and Navarro-Lozano (2004) and Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) fo extensive discussion of matching estimators.
43See Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd (1998) and Heckman, Ichimura, and To If the goal of the analysis is to estimate ATT, one can get by with the weaker assump only Yo is mean independent of D conditional on X since E(Y ID = 1, X = x) is identi observational data so there can be selection arising from dependence between Y1 and D
44In particular, assume Yj = pj(X) + Uj for j = 0, 1, assume D = 11[Y1 - Yo > C and let UD = Uc - (U1 - Uo). Then if Uc iL (U1 - Uo) and Uc has a log concave dens E(Y1 - YolX, UD = UD) is decreasing in uD, zr(x) > AATE(X), and the matching cond not hold. If Uc 1L (U1 - Uo) but Uc does not have a log concave density, then it is stil that (U1 - U0, UD) is negative quadrant dependent. One can show that (U1 - Uo, U negative quadrant dependent implies that At'(x) > AATE(x) and thus again that the conditions cannot hold. See Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) for further discussion.
45It is sometimes said that the matching assumptions are "for free" (see Gill an (2001)) because one can always replace unobserved F(YI1X = x, D = 0) with F(Y D = 1) and unobserved F(YojX = x, D = 1) with F(YoIX = x, D = 0). This ignores terfactual states generated under the matching assumptions that (C-1) is true in the p The assumed absence of selection is not a "for free" assumption, and produces fund different counterfactual states for the same model under matching and selection assum
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

710 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
tions for consttucting PRTE for new environments and for historical data.
Using the terminology of Campbell and Stanley (196 impact of a program in place in a particular environment i ternal validity." Extrapolating internally valid estimates t "external validity," or forecasting the effects of new polic problems which we now address.
Let a E A denote a policy characterized by random v denote an environment characterized by random vector X collection of policy-environment (a, e) pairs that have be documented. We assume that the environment is autonom of a does not affect Xe. Letting Xe,a denote the value of autonomy requires the following statement:
(A-8) For all a, e, Xe,a = Xe (autonomy).
Autonomy is a more general notion than the concept intro concepts are the same when the policy is a treatment. Ge feedback effects can cause a failure of autonomy. In this se autonomy, in accordance with the partial equilibrium tradit effect literature.46
Evaluating a particular policy a' in environment e' is (a', e') E N. One simply looks at the associated outcome fects formed in that policy environment and applies the discussed to obtain internally valid estimates. The challeng ing the impacts of policies (a') in environments (e') for (a
We show how AMTE plays the role of a policy invariant in creating counterfactual states never previously experi the problem of constructing the policy relevant treatment eff discussion applies more generally to the other treatment p
Given the assumptions invoked in Section 3, AMTE can a whole menu of policies characterized by different cond of Pa'. In addition, given our assumptions, we can focus on is characterized by Za,, produces the distribution FPa, x, w variant AMTE without having to conduct a new investigati tionships for each proposed policy.47
5.1. Constructing Weights for New Policies in a Common
The problem of constructing APRTE for policy a' (comp ronment e when (a', e) 4 N entails constructing E(V(Ya,
46However, see Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998) for an examp
treatment model.
47Ichimura and Taber (2002) present a discussion of local policy analysis in a more general framework without the MTE structure, using a framework developed by Hurwicz (1962).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 711
assumption that the baseline policy is observed, so (ai (A-1)-(A-5), (A-7), and (A-8), and use (3) to characteriz icy does not change the distribution of (Yo, YI, UD) cond these conditions, Equation (6) is a valid expression for PR ing PRTE only requires identification of AMTE and constr the policy histories He, defined as the elements of H for a ment e, He = {a: (a, e) E )}.
Associated with the policy histories a E -e is a collection {Za: a E Ne)}. Suppose that a new policy a' can be written some j E Ne, where Ta,,j is a known deterministic transfo the same list of variables as Zj. Examples of policies that in this way are tax and subsidy policies on wages, prices, a fect unit costs (wages or prices) and transfers. Tuition mig for everyone by the same amount or tuition might be sh nonlinear function of current tuition, parents' income, a characteristics in Zj.
Constructing Fp,, xe from data in the policy history entails
From the definitions, Pr(Pa, < tlXe) = Pr(Za, :Pr(Da, = (i) we know the distribution of Za, and (ii) we know th 11 Za' = Z, Xe = x) over the appropriate support, we can the bution of Pa' conditional on X,. Given that Za, = Ta,,j(Zj) f Ta,,j(-), step (i) is straightforward since we recover the dist the distribution of Zj by using the fact that Pr(Za, < tlX
tlXe). Alternatively, part of the specification of the policy a' bution Pr(Za, < tlXe). We now turn to the second step, rec Pr(Da, = llZa, = z, Xe = x) over the appropriate support.
If Za, and Zj contain the same elements, though possibly tributions, then a natural approach to forecasting the new that
(15) Pj(z) = Pr(Dj = 11Zj = z, Xe)
= Pr(Da, = 11Za, = z, Xe) = Pa,(z),
i.e., that over a common support for Zj and Za, the known conditional probability function and the desired conditional probability function agree. Condition (15) will hold, for example, if Dj = l[LD(Zj) - UD > 0], Da, = 1[LLD(Za') - UD > 0], Zj IL UDIXe, and Za, IL UDIXe. Even if condition (15) is satisfied on a common support, the support of Zj and Za, may not be the same. If the support of the distribution of Za, is not contained in the support of the distribution of Z7, then some form of extrapolation is needed. Alterna-
tively, if we strengthen our assumptions so that (15) holds for all j E -Ne, we
can identify Pa'(z) for all z in U1_-r Supp(Zj). However, there is no guarantee
that the support of the distribution of Za, will be contained in Uj1en Supp(Z1), in which case some form of extrapolation is needed.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

712 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
If extrapolation is required, then one approach is to functional form for Pj(.). Given a parametric functiona joint distribution of (Dj, Zj) to identify the unknown then extrapolate the parametric functional form to ev ation points in the support of Za,. Alternatively, if the support of Za, and Zj,48 so there is some overlap in th a' supports of Z, we may use nonparametric methods (1994) with functional restrictions (e.g., homogeneity) probabilities on new supports or to bound them. Unde ditions, we may use analytic continuation to extend P to a new support for each X, = x (Rudin (1974)).
The approach just presented is based on the assum tion (15). That assumption is quite natural when Za, an same elements, say they both contain tuition and par in some cases Za, might contain additional elements n an example, Za, might include new user fees, while ZJ subsidies but does not include user fees. In this case, th Equation (15) is not expected to hold and is not even we
contain a different number of elements.
A more basic approach analyzes a class of policies that operate on constraints, prices, and endowments arrayed in vector C. Given the preferences and technology of the agent, a given C = c, however arrived at, generates the same choices for the agent. Thus a wage tax offset by a wage subsidy of the same amount produces a wage that has the same effect on choices as a nopolicy wage. Policy j affects C (e.g., it affects prices paid, endowments, and constraints). Define a map k1j: Zj --+ Cj which maps a policy j, described by Zj, into its consequences (Cj) for the baseline, fixed-dimensional vector C. A new policy a', characterized by Za,, produces Ca, that is possibly different from Cj for all previous policies j] e ,.
To construct the random variable Pa' = Pr(Da, = llZa,, Xe), we postulate
that
Pr(Dj = 1IZj E 0l'(c), Xe = x) = Pr(Dj = 1 Cj = c, X,= x) = Pr(Da, = IICa = c, Xe = x)
= Pr(Dal- = lZa , E aj(c), Xe = X),
swumheprtieonPs,-1ou(cr)a=bil{izty:"jt(oz)re=cocv}eranPrd(D/a,2=(cI)IZ=a, {=z:zI,aX,(ez)= =x)cf}o.rGalilv(ez,nx)thinese as-
the support of (Za,, Xe) depends on what #1 functions have been historically
48If we strengthen condition (15) to hold for all j c :e,, then the condition becomes that Supp(Za,) n ,Supp(Z)upp(Z) is not empty.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 713
observed and how rich the histories of Cj, j e "e are. tion point in the support of the distribution of Za,, the c = :,a (za) evaluation point in the support of the distrib If, in the policy histories, there is at least one j E N suc a zj with (zj, x) in the support of the distribution of (Zj, struct the probability of the new policy from data in th methods used to extrapolate Pa,(.) over new regions, disc ply here. If the distribution of Ca, (or a,, and the distribu
as part of the specification of the proposed policy, the di can be constructed using the constructed Pa,. Alternativel
to Cj by Ca, = 'a,,j(Cj) for a known function /a',j or if w by Za,, = Ta,,j(Zj) for a known function Ta,,j, and the dist Zi are known for some j E 7-,, we can apply the method to derive Fp,,Ix, and hence the policy weights for the new
This approach assumes that a new policy acts on com policy in e,, so it is possible to forecast the effect of a po new aspects. The essential idea is to recast the new aspec of old aspects previously measured. Thus in a model 1[Y1 - Yo - B > 0], where Y, - Yo is the discounted gain in to school and B is the tuition cost. Here the effect of cos of the effect of return. Historically, we might only obser (say tuition has never previously been charged), but B is (has the same effect on choice, except for sign) as Y1 historical variation in Y1 - Yo can be used to nonparame effect of introducing B, provided that the support of P support generated by the policy histories in Ne. Otherw structure (parametric or semiparametric) must be impose problem for Pa'.
As another example, following Marschak (1953), consid of wage taxes in a world where there has never before be wage without taxes. We seek to forecast a posttax net w where T is the tax rate and b is a constant shifter. Thus
transformation of policy Zj. We can construct Za, from under (A-2) using Pr(Dj = l1Zj = z) = Pr(Da, = 11Za, = z the response to after tax wages is the same as the response tax level. The issue is whether Pa'lx, lies in the historica extrapolation is needed. Nonlinear versions of this examp
As a final example, environmental economists use varia nent of cost (e.g., travel cost) to estimate the effect of a registration fee). See Smith and Banzhaf (2004). Relating acteristics of new policies to the costs and characteristic standard, but sometimes controversial, method for forec new policies.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

714 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
In the context of our model, extrapolation and fore constructing Pa, and its distribution. If policy a', cha consists of new components that cannot be related to of characteristics whose variation can be identified, th Then Pa, and its distribution cannot be formed using applied to historical data.
When it can be applied, our approach allows us to si casting problem and concentrate our attention on fore ties and their distribution in solving the policy forecas choice theory and choice data to construct these object of new policies by relating new policies to previously
5.2. Forecasting the Effects of Policies in New Envir
When the effects of policy a are forecast for a new baseline environment e, and when Xe # Xe,, in genera FPalXe will change. In general, neither object is enviro new Xe, may have a different support than Xe or any In addition, the new (Xe,, UD) stochastic relationship m
FhziasItXoer, ifcraolm(XFez,aXUeDc)anstboechdoansetiucsirnegla(ti)iofnunshctiipon. aCl ofnorsmtru(icntcilnudginFgPsaeImXi,pafrrao-m Fa, Xe and
metric functional restrictions) or (ii) analytic continuation methods. Notice that the maps Ta,j and (Pa may depend on Xe, and so the induced changes in these transformations must also be modeled. There is a parallel discussion for AMTE(x, UD). The stochastic dependence between Xe, and (U1, Uo, UD) may be different from the stochastic dependence between Xe and (U1, Uo, UD). We suppress the dependence of Uo and U, on e and a only for convenience of exposition and make it explicit in the next paragraph.
Forecasting new stochastic relationships between Xe, and (U1, Uo, UD) is a difficult task. It can be avoided if we invoke the traditional exogeneity assumptions of classical econometrics:
(A-9) For all e, a, (Ui,e,a, Uo,e,a, UD,e,a) IL (Xe, Za).
Under (A-9), we only encounter the support problems for both AMTE and the distribution of Pr(Da = 1lZa, Xe) in constructing policy counterfactuals.
Conditions (A-7)-(A-9) are unnecessary if the only goal of the analysis is to establish internal validity, the standard objective of the treatment effect literature. Autonomy and exogeneity conditions become important issues if we seek external validity. An important lesson from this analysis is that as we try to make the treatment effect literature do the tasks of structural econometrics (i.e., make out of sample forecasts), the assumptions invoked in the two literatures come together.
49We suppress the dependence of UD on a for notational convenience.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 715
5.3. A Comparison of Three Approaches
Table V compares the strengths and limitations of the th policy evaluation that we have discussed: the structural ventional treatment effect approach, and the recently dev treatment effects based on the MTE function developed in
The approach based on the MTE function and the structu interpretability of parameters. Like the structural approac range of policy evaluation questions. The MTE parameter is and less easily extrapolated across environments than are s ters, unless nonparametric versions of invariance and exog are made. However, AMTE is comparable across populations tributions of P (conditional on Xe) and results from one applied to another population under the conditions present Analysts can use AMTE to forecast a variety of policies. Thi erty is shared with conventional structural parameters. Our the problem of external validity which is ignored in the stan fect approach. The price of these advantages of the structu greater range of econometric problems that must be solve in the conventional treatment approach at the cost of pro that cannot be linked to well-posed economic models and h vide building blocks for an empirically motivated general eq or for investigation of the impacts of new public policies. T the preferences of the agents being studied and provides a tion with well-posed economic models. If the goal of a stu one policy in place (the problem of internal validity), the st invoked in this section of the paper, and in structural eco necessary. Even if this is the only goal of the analysis, how allows the analyst to generate all treatment effects and IV common parameter and provides a basis for unification of t
literature.
6. MONOTONICITY, UNIFORMITY, NONSEPARABILITY, INDE
POLICY INVARIANCE: THE LIMITS OF INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES
The analysis of this paper and the entire recent literature on instrume variables estimators for models with heterogeneous responses (i.e., m with outcomes of the form (2a) and (2b)) relies critically on the assumpt that the treatment choice equation has a representation in the additively arable form (3). From Vytlacil (2002), we know that, under our assumpti this assumption is equivalent to the assumption of monotonicity as defin by Imbens and Angrist (1994). Using the notation of Section 2.1, Imbens Angrist define monotonicity as the following condition: if the Z are cha for everyone from Z = z to Z = z', D~ > Dz, or Dz < Dz, for all UD co tional on X. A better name for this condition would be "uniformity," sinc
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

716 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
TABLE V
COMPARISON OF ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO PROGRAM EVALUATION
Structural Econometric Treatment Effect Approach Based Approach Approach on MTE
Interpretability Well defined eco- Link to economics Interpretable in terms nomic parameters and welfare compar- of willingness to pay; and welfare compar- isons obscure weighted averages of
isons the MTE answer well-
posed econo
tions
Range of questions Answers many addressed terfactual questions ment effect or narrow tions, generates all
range of effects treatment parameters Extrapolation to Provides ingredients Evaluates one pro- Can be partially new environments for extrapolation gram in one environ- extrapolated; extrap-
ment olates to new policy
environments with different distributions
of the probability of participation due solely to differences
in distributions of Z
Comparability Policy invariant pa- Not generally compa- Partially comparable; across studies rameters comparable rable comparable across en-
across studies vironments with different distributions of the probability of par-
ticipation due solely
to differences in distributions of Z
Key econometric Exogeneity, policy in- Selection bias Selection bias: exoproblems variance, and selec- geneity and policy in-
tion bias variance if used for forecasting
Range of policies Programs with either Programs with partial Programs with partial that can be evalu- partial or universal coverage (treatment coverage (treatment ated coverage, depending and control groups) and control groups)
on variation in data (prices/endowments)
Extension to gen- Need to link to time Difficult because link Can be linked to n eral equilibrium series data; parame- to economics is not parametric general evaluation ters compatible with precisely specified equilibrium models
general equilibrium under exogeneity and theory policy invariance
describes a condition across people rat particular person.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 717
This uniformity condition imparts an asymmetry to the variable enterprise. Responses are permitted to be heter way, but choices of treatment are not. In this section, we of additive separability in (3). We establish that in the ab arability or uniformity, the entire instrumental variable in this paper and the entire recent literature collapses. P fined as weighted averages of an MTE, but MTE and the cannot be identified using any instrumental variable strat
One natural benchmark nonseparable model is a random of choice D = 1[Zp > 0], where 3 is a random coeffici (Z, U0, U1). If p is a random coefficient with a nondegen and with components that take both positive and negati is clearly violated. However, it can be violated even when are of the same sign if Z is a vector.
To consider a more general case, relax the assumption o
(16a) D* -= D(Z, UD),
where ID(Z, UD) is not necessarily additively separable in not necessarily a scalar.50 In the random coefficient exam
(16b) D= 1 [D* > 0].
We maintain assumptions (A-1)-(A-5) and (A-8). In special cases, (16a) can be expressed in an additive
For example, if D* is weakly separable in Z and UD, D any UD, where 0(Z) is a scalar function, AD is increasing scalar, then we can write (16b) in the same form as (3):
D = 1[O(Z) > U],
where U = UgD(0; UD) and U 1 ZIX, and the inverse function is expressed with respect to the first argument. Vytlacil (2002) shows that any model that does not satisfy uniformity (or "monotonicity") will not have a representation
in this form.5' In the additively separable case, the MTE (4) has three equivalent interpre-
tations. (i) The term UD is the only unobservable in the first stage decision
5OThe additively separable latent index model is more general than it may at first appear. It is shown in Vytlacil (2004) that a wide class of threshold crossing models without the additive structure on the latent index will have a representation with the additively separable structure on
the latent index.
51In the random coefficient case where Z = (1, Z1), where Z1 is a scalar, and p = (/3o, 1) if p1 > 0 for all realizations, we can write the choice rule in the form of (3): Z1 81 > -/0o Z > -3o0/13 and UD = --o0/131. This trick does not work in the general case.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

718 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
rule, and MTE is the average effect of treatment given teristics in the decision rule (UD = UD). (ii) A person w indifferent between treatment or not if P(Z) = UD, wh utility function. Thus, the MTE is the average effect o the individual would be indifferent between treatmen (iii) One can also view the additively separable form (3) we are defining the parameter and interpret the MTE conditional on the additive error term from the first s all interpretations of the MTE and under the assumpti ing sections of this paper, MTE can be identified by L depend on Z, and hence it is policy invariant and the generate all treatment effects, all policy effects, and a
The three definitions are not the same in the g case (16a). Heckman and Vytlacil (2001a) extend MT case using interpretation (i). The MTE defined this wa changes in Z. They show that LIV is a weighted av possibly negative weights and does not identify MTE. hold, the definition of MTE allows one to integrate M
treatment effects, but the instrumental variables estim Alternatively, one could define MTE based on (ii):
BATE(X, Z) E(Y - YolX = x, UD E UD LLD(Z, U
This is the average treatment effect for individuals w between treatment or not at a given value of z. Heckm show that in the nonseparable case LIV does not ident MTE does not change when the distribution of Z chan port of MTE does not change."2 In general, this defin allow one to integrate up MTE to obtain the treatmen
A third possibility is to force the index rule into an a
d/e-ft*inDe(ZM ) =TEE(aSsLEL(DY(1Z,-UYDo)IIXZ),= dxe,fU inLin-gUUs L). =NIoLtDe (Zth, aUt of Z, is not policy invariant, and is not structural. LIV With this definition of the MTE, it is not possible in
MTE to obtain the various treatment effects.
For any version of the nonseparable model except those that can be transformed to separability, index sufficiency fails. To see this most directly, assume that ALLD(Z, UD) is absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure. Define f2(z) = {uID :LD(Z, UD) > 01. In the additively separable case,
P(z) - Pr(D = lZ = z) = Pr(uD E 0(z)) and P(z) = P(z') + 92(z) = 92(z').
This produces index sufficiency. In the more general case of (16a) it is possible to have (z, z') such that P(z) = P(z') and 9(z) -4 9(z'), so index sufficiency
does not hold.
52If the support of Z changes, then the MTE must be extended to a new support.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 719
6.1. Implications of Nonseparability
In this section, we develop generalization (i), leavin other interpretations for another occasion. We focus on the other treatment parameters follows by parallel arg
For any uD in the support of the distribution of UD UD) > 0). For example, in the random coefficient ca D = 1[ZP3 > 0], we have 2b = {z: zb > 01, where b is fine 1A(t) to be the indicator function for the event t
shows that
(17) E(Ya) - E(Yai) = E[E(YaIX) - E(Ya, IX)]
=1 [f fE(A|X = UD)
( Pr[Z, E n, X = x]
x (-P-rP[rZ[aZ,a'G, EuuDD -IXxU= dxF] uDDIX(uDIx) dFx(x).
Thus, without additive separability, we can still derive an expression for PRTE and by similar reasoning the other treatment parameters. However, to evaluate the expression requires knowledge of MTE, of Pr[Za e ,uDIX = x] and Pr[Za, E 2uD X = x] for every (UD, x) in the support of the distribution of (UD, X), and of the distribution of UD. In general, if no structure is placed on the ID function, one can normalize UD to be unit uniform (or a vector of unit uniform random variables) so that FUDlx will be known. However, in this case the ,uDD = ({z: D(Z, UD) > 01 sets will not in general be identified. If structure is placed on the ALD function, one might be able to identify the
DMD = (Z:" D(Z, UD) > 01 sets, but then one needs to identify the distribution of UD conditional on X. If structure is placed on LD, one cannot in general normalize the distribution of UD to be unit uniform without undoing the structure being imposed on AD.
In particular, consider the random coefficient model D = 1[ZP > 0], where UD = 0 is a random vector, so that Q2p = {z: zp > 01. In this case, if all of the other assumptions hold, including Z II LPIX, and the policy change does not
affect (Y1, Yo, X, 3p), the PRTE is given by E(Ya) - E(Ya,)
= E[E(YaIX) - E(Ya, X)]
= f E([ x, =x b)
SPr[Za c QblX = x] X(- Pr[Za, E bI |X = x d ]Fxb x)J dFx(x).
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

720 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
Because structure has been placed on the AD(Z, p) func known. However, evaluating the function requires know tion of p which will not in general be identified without f Normalizing the distribution of /3 to be a vector of uni ables produces the distribution of /3, but eliminates th structure on ID and results in Df2 sets that are not iden
Even if the weights are identified, Heckman and Vyt it is not possible to use LIV to identify MTE without a tween Z and UD in the selection rule index. Appendix D the random coefficient model. Thus, without additive se index for the selection rule, we can still create an exp the other treatment parameters), but both the weights are no longer identified using instrumental variables.
One superficially plausible way to avoid these problem
ALD(Z) = E(4D(Z, UD)IZ) and UD = ACD(Z, UD) - E ing the model D = 1[AD(Z) - UD > 0]. We keep th
implicit. One could redefine MTE using UD and procee possessed additive separability between observables and latent index. This is the method pursued in approach (ii
For two reasons, this approach does not solve the pro adequate generalization of MTE. First, with this definit (Z, UD), and a policy that changes Z will then also c invariance of the MTE no longer holds. Second, this ap that is no longer statistically independent of Z, so tha longer holds when UD is substituted for UD even when Lack of independence between observables and unob index both invalidates our expression for PRTE (and th other treatment effects) and causes LIV to no longer id
The nonseparable model can also restrict the support consider a standard normal random coefficient model
(Z= (1, Z1)). Assume /3 N(0, o), /31 N(/1, o-2), and
P(zi)=eP( P3'z, 22)'
where in this usage P is the standard cumulative normal distribution. If the support of z, is t1', then in the standard additive model o-2 = 0 and P(z,) has support [0, 1]. When 0-2 > 0, the support is strictly within the unit interval.54
In the special case when o-2 0, the support is one point (P(z) =-I(PPI/o0)).
53See, e.g., Ichimura and Thompson (1998) for conditions for identifying the distribution of 3 in a random coefficient discrete choice model when Z i /P3.
54The interval is [ 1(-1/31 pl/), 0(Ip11/O-)].
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 721
We cannot, in general, identify ATE, TT, or any treatm endpoints 0 or 1.
Thus the more general case model of nonuniformity tion does not satisfy the index sufficiency property, treatment effects and estimators is, in general, less than ficient model for choice may explain the empirical supp found in Heckman, Ichimura, Smith, and Todd (1998).
6.2. Implications of Dependence We next consider relaxing the independence assum Z 711 UDIX while maintaining the assumption that We maintain the other assumptions, including additive Z and UD in the latent index for the selection rule (Eq sumption that the policy changes Z but does not chang we assume that the policy change does not change the invariance). Given these assumptions, we derive in App expression for PRTE in the nonindependent case:
(18) E(Ya) - E(Ya,)
= E[E(YaJX) - E(Ya, X)]
= [E(AX = x, UD=UD)
( Pr[D (Za,) < UD IX = x, UD = UD] - Pr[AtD(Za) < UD IX = X, UD = UD
x dFuDIx(UD x)] dFx(x).
Although we can derive an expression for PRTE without requiring independence between Z and UD, to evaluate this expression requires knowledge of MTE, of Pr[ tD(Za) < uDIX = x, UD = UD], and of Pr[AD(Za) < uDIX = x, UD = uD] for every (x, uD) in the support of the distribution of (X, UD). This requirement is stronger than in the case of independence, since the weights no longer depend only on the distribution of Pa(Za) and Pa, (Za,) conditional on X. To evaluate these weights requires knowledge of the function /xD and of the joint distribution of (UD, Za) and (UD, Za,) conditional on X, and these will in general not be identified without further assumptions.
Even if the weights are identified, Heckman and Vytlacil (2001a) show that it is not possible to use LIV to identify MTE without independence between Z and UD conditional on X. Thus, without conditional independence between Z and UD in the latent index for the decision rule, we can still create an expression for PRTE, but both the weights and the MTE function are no longer identified without invoking further assumptions.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

722 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
One superficially appealing way to avoid these proble
FUIx,z(UD) and ILD (Z) = Fuolx,z(AD(Z)), so D =
1[AID(Z) - UD > 0] with UD " Unif[O, 1] conditional on independent of X and Z. It might seem that the previo over. However, by defining UI = FuDIx,z(UD), we have that depends functionally on Z and X, and hence we v MTE with respect to the shifts in the distribution of Z
6.3. Do We Need Uniformity?
The monotonicity or uniformity condition and the a positive weights for MTE are both required to obtain g using IV. If these conditions are violated, changes in Z with some people changing into treatment and others l not identify the "gross effect" of treatment. Recall fro tion 4.3 that even if we have monotonicity or uniform section (a necessary and sufficient condition for the e tion (4)), the discussion in Section 4.3 reveals that in a instruments we may still obtain negative IV weights un
other instruments.
Monotonicity and independence are invoked when th by D) is the policy being evaluated. However, treatmen all possible policies of interest, and if the goal is to ev policy on aggregate outcomes, as in APRTE, the monoto not be needed. In that case, one is interested in the ne and not the impact of treatment operating through a p treatment. The policy of interest may entail two-way fl
Consider the case where D indicates schooling, which fine D = 1 if the person goes to college and D = 0 othe policy being studied is the introduction of a physical ment in colleges along with mandatory augmented athl
iocfy choalslengoe,efsfoeictt iosna(Yv1a,liYdOZ) .(eS.go.m , peopteenotpilael h eaartneinPgEs)w , are attracted by colleges with good gyms, so monotonic olated. If Za = z is the policy with PE and Z,, = z' is th E(YIZa = z) - E(YIZa, = z') is a perfectly valid policy fect of the policy on aggregate outcomes-even if unif AMTE is not policy invariant. One only needs uniformit the other assumptions only when the policy is a treatm
6.4. The Limits of Instrumental Variable Estima
The treatment effect literature focuses on a class of po ment choices in the same direction for everyone. Gen
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 723
have universally positive weights on AMTE. They are n everyone in the same direction. They do not necessari ment effects. However, the effect of treatment is not policy interest. Thus, in the example just presented, s through which policy operates. One might be interested ing (the treatment effect) or the effect of the policy. T unless the policy is the treatment.
Generalizing the MTE to the case of a nonseparable c olates the monotonicity condition, we can define but ca parameters of interest. If we make the model symmetr outcome and choice equations, the method of instrum extensions of it break down in terms of estimating eco parameters. This case is beyond the outer limits of an though it captures intuitively plausible phenomena. M methods are required.5
7. SUMMARY AND PROPOSED EXTENSIONS
This paper develops an approach to policy evaluation based on the marginal treatment effect (AMTE), which provides a choice-theoretic foundation for organizing the treatment effect literature. All of the conventional treatment effect parameters can be expressed as different weighted averages of AMTE These conventional treatment effect parameters do not, in general, answer economically interesting questions. We define the policy relevant treatment effect as the solution to a Benthamite policy criterion for policies operating on decisions to participate, but not on potential outcomes. The policy relevant treatment effect can be represented as a weighted average of AMTE, where the weights differ in general from the weights used to generate conventional treatment effects. Thus the conventional treatment effects are not guaranteed to answer policy relevant questions.
Instrumental variable estimators and OLS estimators converge to expressions that can be represented as weighted averages of AMTE parameters, with the weights in general different from those used to define the various treatment effects and the weights not necessarily positive, so they do not identify a gross treatment effect. We show how to check whether the weights are positive. Conventional IV and matching assumptions impose a strong condition on the AMTE-that selection into programs is not made in terms of any unobservable gain from program participation.
We present methods for estimating AMTE based on local instrumental variables and we develop a new instrumental variable for recovering policy relevant
55The framework of Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) can be generalized to allow for random coefficients models in choice equations and lack of policy invariance in the sense of (A-7). However, a fully semiparametric analysis does not appear to be possible. This generalization is being prepared for publication.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

724 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
treatment effects using standard instrumental variable conditions for using IV to estimate well-posed policy ques IV need not generate any interesting policy counterfactua policy counterfactuals for which no IV can be generated. geneous responses, there is no natural superiority of conv in estimating policy relevant parameters. We develop th to forecast the effects of old policies on new environmen new policies. These issues are typically ignored in the trea ture, but are central to the structural policy evaluation lit
The model presented in this paper and the models p cent literature on instrumental variables in heterogeneou fundamentally asymmetric. Responses to treatment are geneous in a general way, but choices of treatment are n a symmetrically heterogeneous model, the method of in breaks down entirely and a different approach to econom is required.
Dept. of Economics, University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th IL 60637, U.S.A.; jjh@uchicago.edu
and Dept. of Economics, Stanford University, 579 Serra Mall, U.S.A.; vytlacil@stanford.edu.
Manuscript received June, 2001; final revision received October,
APPENDIX A: TESTABLE MONOTONICITY IN P RESTRICTION
THEOREM 1: Assume Yo, Y1, and D are determined by Equations (2a), (2b), and (3), respectively. Assume conditions (A-1) through (A-5) hold.
(i) Let go, g, be any real valued functions such that go(Yo, X), gi(Y1, X) > 0 with probability 1. Then E((1 - D)go(Y, X)IX, P(Z) = p) is weakly decreasing in p and E(Dg, (Y, X)IX, P(Z) = p) is weakly increasing in p.
(ii) Let go, g1 be any real valued functions such that go (Yo, X), gl(YI, X) > 0 with probability 1. Then E((1 - D)go(Y, X)IX, P(Z) = p) is strictly decreasing in p and E(Dg, (Y, X)IX, P(Z) = p) is strictly increasing in p.
PROOF: Consider assertion (i). Consider E(Dgl(Y, X)IX = x, P(Z) = p)
for some x. Let pI, po denote any two points in the support of the distribution of P(Z) conditional on X = x such that p, > po. Then
E(Dgi(Y, X)IX = x, P(Z) = pi)
- E(Dg1(Y, X)IX = x, P(Z) = Po)
= E(I[UD < P(Z)]g1(Y,,X)IX = x, P(Z) = pi)
- E(1[UD < P(Z)]g1(Y,, X)jX = x, P(Z) = po)
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 725
= E(1I[UD 1 pt1]g(Y1, X)IX = x)
- E(1[UD < pogl1(Y1, X)IX = x)
= E({J[UD < Po0 + J[po < UD _ pIJgl(Y1, X)JX = x)
- E(1[UD < po]g1(Y1, X)IX = x)
= E(1l[po < UD < plg (YI1, X)IX = x)
>0,
where the first equality follows from the definition of D and uses the fact that Dg,(Y, X) = Dg,(YI, X); the second equality uses independence condition (A-2); the third equality uses the fact that po < pi and thus that 1[UD Pil = 1[UD < Po] + [Po < UD 5 p1]; the fourth equality follows from linearity of expectations; and the final inequality follows from gi(Y1, X) > 0 with probability 1. The proof that E((1 -D)go(Y, X)IX, P(Z) = p) is decreasing in p follows from a similar argument. Assertion (ii) follows from a trivial
modification of the last line of the above proof. Q.E.D.
Consider the following examples of go and gl: (i) If Y1, Yo are known to be nonnegative (for example, Y1, Yo are indicator variables or Y1, Yo are wages), then we may choose gj(Y, X) = Y. this example, Theorem 1 implies that E((1 - D)YIX, P(Z) = p) is weakl decreasing in p and E(DYIX, P(Z) = p) is weakly increasing in p. More g erally, if Y1, Yo are known to be bounded from below by a function of X that Y1 > 11(X), Yo > lo(X) with probability 1, then we may choose g1(Y, X
Y -i (X) so that Theorem 1 implies that E((1- D)(Y - lo(X))IX, P(Z) = is weakly decreasing in p and E(D(Y - 11(X))IX, P(Z) = p) is weakly incre
ing in p. (ii) Without any assumptions on the support of the distribution of Y1, Yo,
let t denote a real number and take g1(Y, X) = 1[Y < t] for j = 0, 1. Then Theorem 1 implies that Pr(D = 0, Y < tIX, P(Z) = p) is weakly decreasing in p and Pr(D = 1, Y < tIX, P(Z) = p) is weakly increasing in p. More generally, let A denote any measurable subset of the real line and take gj(Y, X) = 1[Y E A] for j = 0, 1. Then the conclusion of the proposition can be rewritten as Pr(D = 0, Y E AIX, P(Z) = p) is weakly decreasing in p and Pr(D = 1, Y E AIX, P(Z) = p) is weakly increasing in p.
For any choice of go, gj, the restriction of Theorem 1 leads to the prediction
that regression functions E((1 -D)go(Y, X)IX, P(Z) = p) and E(Dg,(Y, X)I X, P(Z) = p) satisfy the monotonicity conditions. This is an example of a nonparametric null with shape restrictions versus a nonparametric alternative. A formal test of the null hypothesis can be implemented using the methodology of Ghosal, Sen, and van der Vaart (2000).
The restrictions of Theorem 1 nest the Imbens-Rubin (1997) restrictions on IV as a special case. They assume a binary Z, and obtain the density of
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

726 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
Y1 and Yo from the observed data and derive the testab densities be nonnegative.56 Our analysis is more genera
APPENDIX B: DERIVATION OF PRTE AND IV WEIGHTS
PROOF OF EQUATION (6): To simplify the notation, assume that V(Y) = Modifications required for the more general case are obvious. Define A ( be the indicator function for the event t A. Then
E(Ya X) = E(Ya X, Pa(Za) = p) dFPaix(p)
= 1flO[0,pj](UD)E(Yl,atX, UD =ID)
+ 11(p,1(UD)E(Yo,aX, UD = D) du] dFpalx(p)
= f [1UD,1I(p)E(Yi,aIX, UD = uD)
+ 1(O,uDI(p)E(Yo,aX, UD = uD)] dFpaix(p)] duD
= f(1 - FPai(UD))E(Yi,a X, UD = uD)
+ FPaIX(uD)E(Yo,alX, UD = uD)] duD. This derivation involves changing the order of integration. Note that from (A-4),
El1[0,p](UD)E(Yl,alX, UD = UD) + 1(p,l](UD)E(YO,a(X, UD = UD)j
<_E(IYI + IYol) < c,
56See also Heckman, Smith, and Taber (1998) for a closely related test. 57For ease of exposition, suppress conditioning on X. Take the case where Z = 0, 1 and P(1) > P(0). Consider the Y1 outcome; the analysis for Yo is completely symmetric. For binary Z with P(1) > P(0), our restriction can be rewritten as E(Dgl(Y)IZ = 1) > E(Dgi(Y)IZ = 0). Take gi(Y) = l[Y E A] for any prespecified set A, for example, the intervals examined in the histogram analyzed in the Imbens-Rubin paper. In this special case, our monotonicity restriction is that Pr(D = 1, Y E AIZ = 1) - Pr(D = 0, Y e AIZ = 0) > 0, and the restriction is the same as the Imbens and Rubin restriction of a nonnegative density. Our analysis replaces their densities with the probability that Y lies in any given set. Thus, their restriction is a very special case of the general monotonicity restriction developed in this paper.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 727
so the change in the order of integration is valid by Fubin ing policy a to policy a',
E(Ya X) - E(Ya,IX)
= fE(AIX, UD = D)(FppaX(UD)- FPaIX(UD)) d
which gives the required weights. (Recall A = Yj - Yo and
drop the a, a' subscripts on outcomes and errors.) Q.E.D.
Relaxing (A-7): Implications of Noninvariance for PRTE Suppose that all of the assumptions invoked up to Section 3 are satisfied,
including additive separability in the latent index choice Equation (3) (equivalently, the monotonicity or uniformity condition). Impose the normalization that the distribution of UD is unit uniform. Suppose however, contrary to (A-7 that the distribution of (Y1, Yo, UD, X) is different under the two regimes a and a'. Thus, let (YI,a, Yo,a, UD,a, Xa) and (Yl,a', Yo,,, UD,a', Xa,) denote the random vectors under regimes a and a', respectively. Following the same analy sis used to derive Equation (6), the PRTE conditional on X is given by
E(YaJXa = x) - E(Ya,IXa, = x)
(I) = E(Yi,a - Yo,aIXa = x, UD,a' lU)
x [FP, lX,a(UIX) - FpaiXa (UIX)] d
(II) +f [E(Yo,aIXa = x, UD,a )
- E(Yo,alXa, = x, UD,a' = u)] du
(III) + [(1 - FE ,x(u1x))
x (E(Yi,a - Y,aIXa = x, UD,a = u) - E(Yl,a, - Yo,a jXa,, UD,a' = u))] du.
Thus, when the policy affects the distribution of (Y1, Yo, UD, X), the PRTE is given by the sum of three terms: (I) the value of PRTE if the policy did not affect (Y1, Yo, X, UD), (II) the weighted effect of the policy change on E(Yo IX, UD), and (III) the weighted effect of the policy change on MTE. Evaluating the PRTE requires knowledge of the MTE function in both regimes and knowledge of E(YoIX = x, UD = u) in both regimes, as well as knowledge of the distribution of P(Z) in both regimes. Note, however, that if we assume
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

728 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
that the distribution of (Yi,a, Yo,a, UD,a) conditional o tribution of (Yi,a,, Yo,a', UD,a') conditional on Xa, = x
Xa = x) = E(Yi,aIUD,a' = u, Xa, = x), E(Yo,aIUD,a UD,a' = U, Xa, = x), and thus terms (II) and (III) are
for PRTE simplifies to the expression of Equation (6).
PROOF OF EQUATION (10): We have
Cov(J(Z), YIX)
= E([J(Z) - E(J(Z)IX)]YIX) = E((J(Z) - E(J(Z)IX))(Yo + D(Y, - Yo))IX) = E((J(Z) - E(J(Z)IX))D(YI - Yo)IX) = E(f(Z)1[UD < P(Z)](Y, - Yo)IX) = E(f(Z)1[UD < P(Z)]E(Y1 - YoIX, Z, UD)IX) = E(J(Z)4[UD < P(Z)]E(Y, - YoIX, UD)IX)
= E(E[J(Z)?[UD < P(Z)](X = x, UD]E(YI - YojX, UD)IX)
= o[E(f(Z)X, P(Z) uD)
x Pr(P(Z) > UD)E(Yl - YojX, UD = UD)] duD
= AMTE(X, uD)E(f(Z)IX, P(Z) > UD) Pr(P(Z) > uD) duD.
The third equality follows from (3); the fourth equality follows from the law of iterated expectations with the inside expectation conditional on (X, Z, UD); the fifth equality follows from assumption (A-2); the sixth equality follows from the law of iterated expectations with the inside expectation conditional on (X = x, UD); the seventh equality follows from Fubini's Theorem and the normalization that UD is distributed unit uniform conditional on X; and the final equality follows from plugging in the definition of AMTE. Yitzhaki (1996, 1999) was the first to develop the interpretation of IV as a weighted average,
although he did not develop the MTE. Q.E.D.
PROOF OF EQUATION (17): We have
E(YaIX)
= E(YaIX, UD = UD, Za = z) dFUD,ZaiX(UD, z)
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 729
= [1nf D (z)E(YIX, UD= UD, Za = z)
+ 1nD (z)E(YoIX, UD = UD, Za = z)] dFUD,ZaX(D, z)
f [In"D (z)E(Y IX, UD = UD) + 1nD (z)E(YoIX, UD UD)] dFUD,ZaX,(uD, z)
= f [1nuD (Z)E(YX, UD = UD)
+ D (z)E(YoIX, UD = UD)]dFZaX(Z)] dFuDx(UD) = [Pr[Za E 2U, X]E(YIlX, UD = UD)
+ (1 - Pr[Za E uD IX])E(YolIX, UD = UD)] dFUD,,(uD),
where ncD denotes the complement of n,, and where the first equality follows from the law of iterated expectations; the second equality follows by plugging in our threshold crossing model for D; the third equality follows from independence Z IL (Y1, Yo, UD) IX; and the fourth and fifth equalities follow by an application of Fubini's Theorem and a rearrangement of terms. Fubini's Theorem may be applied by assumption (A-4). Thus comparing policy a to policy a', we obtain (17):
E(Ya IX) - E(Y, IX)
f E(IIX, UD = UD)
x (Pr[Za E DuD IX] - Pr[Za, E UD |X]) dFUDIX(UD). Q.E.D.
PROOF OF EQUATION (18): We have E(YaIX) = J E(YaIX, UD = UD, Za = z) dFUD,ZaIX(UD, Z) [ 11,PD~cl(z D)E( Ya|X, Z = z, UD = UD)
I j(,D(z),ll(UD)E(Yo IX, Z = z, UD = uD)
_-f[ ,O'D(z)](UD)E(YiIX, UD - UD)
+ 1(D(z),] (UD)E(YolX, UD UD)
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

730 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
- f+[f1((,1D(0,z,)ID(U(Dz))E]((YUoIDX,)EU(DY=YUIDX) , UD =D) ) dFIUD(ZIUD)]
x dFUDIx(UD)
[ (1 - Pr[D(Z) < uD I UD = UD])E(YIIX, UD = UD) + Pr[ILD(Za) < UDIUD - UD]E(YoIX, UD = UD)
x dFUDIX(UD),
where the first equality follows from the law of iterated expectations; the second equality follows by plugging in our model for D; the third equality follows from independence Z IL (Y1, Yo) IX, UD; the fourth equality follows by an application of Fubini's Theorem; and the final equality follows immediately. Thus
comparing policy a to policy a', we obtain (18) in the text. Q.E.D.
APPENDIX C: PROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1: We first show that, given (i), conditio and (iii) are sufficient for the instrument Jx(Z) defined in the propositi have the desired properties. As a preliminary step, note that
E(JIX = x) = fl[fplx(p Ix) > O]w'(plx)dp=f w'(pIx) dp=0,
where the first equality comes from plugging in the proposed Jx and using condition (i); the second equality follows from condition (iii); and the final equality follows from condition (ii). We now check that the proposed Jx is correlated with D under conditions (i)-(iii):
Cov(Jx (Z), DIX = x) = Cov(Jx(Z), P(Z)IX = x)
= f [ lfpix(plx) > 0]w'(plx)pdp
=jw'(plx)pdp=-1, 0o
where the first equality folows from the law of iterated expectations; the secondequalitycomesfromplugingintheproposedJxandusingE(Jx X=x)=0;andthethirdequalityuse conditon(i )andthefinalequality folowsfromintegrationbypartsusingconditon(i).Wenowcheckthat he proposed instrument Jx implies the desired weights on AMTE. With the proposed Jx, for u such that fPix(ulx) > 0,
T(ulx; Jx)fPIx(u IX)
- = w'(ulx), Cov(Jx, PIX = x)
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 731
where the equality comes from plugging in the proposed X = x) = 0 and Cov(Jx, PIX = x) = -1. Thus, for u such we have that -T(u x; J)fplx(ulx)/l Cov(Jx, PIX = x) = For u such that fplx(ulx) = 0, condition (iii) implies thus trivially -T(uIx;Jx)fpix(uIx)/Cov(Jx,PIX = x) = that fpix(u x) = 0.
We now show that, given condition (i), conditions (ii) an First, consider condition (ii). We have previously establis corresponding to any instrument must integrate to 1, and responding to any instrument must satisfy w(0 x) = 0. O verify that w(llx) = 0 unless the conditional distribution point at 1. The conditional distribution of P(Z) does n at 1 by condition (i). Using condition (i), one can apply for the derivative of an integral to show that the weights instrument will be differentiable. Thus, given condition sponding to any instrument will satisfy condition (ii), a is a necessary condition for there to exist an instrumen the desired weights. Now assume conditions (i) and (ii), a tion (iii). Suppose that (iii) does not hold, so that there e such that fplx(tlx) = 0 but w'(tlx) > 0. Then, for such valu
T(tlx; Jx)fPx(tlx) =0 Cov(Jx, PIX = x)
for any potential instrument Jx while w'(tjx) > 0, and thu not exist an instrument Jx such that
T( (Pt xx;=Jwx)'(ftPixix)(tfloxr) all t.
Cov(Jx, PIX = x)
Thus, given condition (i), conditions (ii) and (iii) are necessary for the e
of an instrument with the desired properties. Q.E.D.
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2: Define
F)Fp,,iX('x) - Fpi x(Ix) E(PaIX = x) - E(Pa X = x)
We now show that conditions (i) and (ii) of Proposition 2 imply conditions (i) and (ii) of Proposition 1 when w(.Ix) is defined in this manner. Note that condition (i) of Proposition 2 immediately implies that condition (i) of Proposition 1 holds. Condition (i) of Proposition 2 implies that w(.Ix) is differentiable for all evaluation points with
w'( E-x) = E(PafPI,XIx(='Ixx))--fpEo(Pwax'I(X'Ix)= x)
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

732 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
Since FP x (.) and Fp,,x (.) are distribution functions, o ify that fo w(ulx) du = 1. Since the propensity scor
0 and 1, using condition (i), FpaIx(1x) = Fp ,lx(lx nFear,,,xw (OeIxh)av=e 0t,haatndcotnhduitsiow ns(ll(ix))a=ndw((iOi)lxof) =Pr0o.pD oseiftiionnin
and (ii) of Proposition 1. Given
w'(lx) = E(PaI(X.Pa=fx1),l-(I(Ex(P) a-, fXpa=IXx)('' X)
we have that condition (iii) of Proposition 2 is equivalent to condition (iii) of Proposition 1 for this choice of w(.lx). The result now follows directly from
Proposition 1. Q.E.D.
PROOF OF PROPOSITION hold almost everywhere wi under the stated conditio
CoC vC (J(o Z)o , Dv IXv )(J (J (Z()Z , )D ,IX Y)I-X = )A_ MT
It follows that Cov(J(Z), DIx) = Cov(J(Z), DIX) = -1, that Cov(J(Z), Y) = E(J(Z)Y) = E[E(J(Z)YIX)], and thus that
CCoovv(J((JZ)(,ZD),)Y)= E[-E(J(Z)Y X)] E[Cov(J(Z), YIX)
[Cov(J(Z), DIX)J
= ['AMTE(x, u)w(u x) du] dFx (x). Q.E.D.
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 4: We first show that, given condition (i), conditions (ii) and (iii) are sufficient for the instrument J,(Z) defined by the proposition to have the desired properties. For notational convenience, define -ir = Pr[P(Z) = pt], for = 1, ..., K. As a preliminary step, note that with this definition of Jx(Z),
K
E(JxIX = x) = E1=[1w7itl - w1I+Iit
K
= [/w=1 Ul- W+11] = -- WK+-= 0,
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 733

where we use the fact that w1 = WK+1 = 0. We now check Jx(Z) is correlated with D under conditions (i) to (iii):

Cov(Jx (Z), DIX = x) = Cov(Jx(Z), P(Z)IX = x)

K

K

= [ll= - W1 l+l]" pIliT1I = = 2 KP - Pl-1Wi
K Pl 1
= w(tlx) dt = w
P=1 l-1
where the first equality follows from the law of iterated expec second equality comes from E(Jx(Z)IX = x) = 0 and pluggin posed Jx(Z); the third equality rearranges terms in the sum WK+1 = 0; the fourth equality uses condition (iii) and the defin the fifth equality uses linearity of integration; and the final equ dition (ii). We now check that the proposed instrument Jx im sired weights on AMTE. Using Cov(Jx(Z), DIX = x) = 1 and X = x) = 0, the IV weights corresponding to the proposed J by hiv(u) = E(Jx(Z)1[P(Z) > u]). We immediately have hiv(u) for u E (PK, 1] and for u E [0, p,]. For u E (pj-, pj], j = 2, ..., K,

E(Jx(Z)1[P(Z) > u]) = L [w, - w1+1]1[p u]i /=1
K
L 1Z=j[WI - W/+1] = Wj - WK+1 = Wj = W(UIX),
where the first equality comes from plugging in the proposed Jx(Z); the second
teeqrumalsi;ttyhefofloluorwths efqruoamlityu feol(lpojw-s1,frpojm]; twhKe+1th=ir0d; aenqdutahlietyfinfaollleoqwuaslitbyyfroellaorwrsanging
by the definition of wj and the fact that u E (pj-1, pj]. We now show that, given condition (i), conditions (ii) and (iii) are necessary.
First, consider condition (ii). One can verify that the weights corresponding to any instrument must integrate to 1. One can also verify that the weights corresponding to any instrument must satisfy w(ulx) = 0 for u< pain and for u > pMax, where pMin and pmax are the minimum and maximum values in the support of the conditional distribution of P(Z). Given condition (i), one can immediately verify that the IV weights for any instrument must satisfy condition (iii). Thus, given condition (i), the weights corresponding to any instrument will satisfy conditions (ii) and (iii), and thus, given condition (i), conditions (ii) and (iii) are necessary conditions for there to exist an instru-
ment that corresponds to the desired weights. Q.E.D.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

734 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
APPENDIX D: LOCAL INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES FOR THE RANDOM COEFFICIENT MODEL
Consider the model
D = [Z3p > 0],
where p is a random variable. For ease of exposition, we leave implicit the conditioning on X covariates. Assume that (Yo, Y1, p) iL Z. Assume that 3 has a density that is absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure on T'K We have
E(YIZ = z) = E(DY, Z = z) + E((1 - D)YoIZ = z).
To simplify the exposition, first consider the first term, E(DY IZ = z). Using the model, the independence assumption, and the law of iterated expectations,
we have
E(DYIZ = z) = E(n[zp/ > 0]Y1) = E(n[z/ > O]E(Y11/))
= E(I{zK[K][K]> -ZI-K]i3[K]JE(Y p3)),
where the final outer expectation is over /. Consider taking the derivative with respect to the Kth element of Z assumed to be continuous. Let Z[K] denote the Kth element of Z and let Z[-K] denote all other elements of Z, and write Z = (Z[-K], Z[K]). Likewise, partition z, P, and b as z = (z[-K], z[K), P/ = (p[-K] /3[K]), and b = (b[-KI, b[KI), where z is a realization of Z and b is a realization of p. For simplicity, suppose that the Kth element of z is positive, z[K] > 0. We obtain
E(DYIZ = z) = E[E(l{zlK]3[K] > -z[-K] 13-K]}E(Yjli3)I/[-KI)]
EE I[K _Z[K] E ( Yj18 ) p[ -K
where the inside expectation is over p[K] conditional on p[-K], i.e., is over the Kth element of P conditional on all other components of P. Thus,
zKd E(DYIZ = z) = E(Y10 -= M(b[-K])) W(b[-K]) db[-K]
where
M(b[-KI) = ((b[-K)', zK] and
b ) Z[-K]b[-K] ( _Z[-K]-K]
(zKIK)2 f~, ZiKI
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 735
with f(.) the density of P (with respect to Lebesgue meas notational simplicity we suppress the dependence of th the weights w(.) on the z evaluation point. In this express ing over E(Y1IP/ = b), but only over b evaluation points s particular, the expression averages over the K - 1 spac each potential realization of b[-K] it is filling in the valu z[K]b[K] = -Z[-K]b[-K], SO that z[K]b[K] + z[-K]b[-K] = 0. No ?i(b[-K]) will be zero for any b[-K] such that f(b[-K], (-Z[ i.e., the weights will be zero for any b[-K] such that there the conditional support of p[K] with z[Kb[K] = Z[-K]b[-K]
Following the same logic for E((1 - D)YolZ = z) we ob

cd E((1Z - D[)YK IZ= z]) - EJ (Y013 -= M(b[-K]))io(b[-K]) db[-K]
and likewise have
ddZP[rK(D]J= 1lZ = z) (b[-K]) db[-K]
so that
(8/azi[K)E(YIZ = z) (8/dZ[K]) Pr(D = 1iZ = z)

Sf E(Y1 - Yo0p = M(b[-K]))w(b[-K]) db-K]
where

w(b[-K]) = v(b[-KI)/ f t(b[-K]) db[-K].

Now consider the question of whether this expression will include both positive and negative weights. Recall that

Thus,

-K][-K]b[-K] -( _Z[-K]b[-K]) (Z[K])2 f b[-K]' [K]

w(b[-K] J 0, if z[-K]b[-K] > 0,
( 0, if z[[-K] < 0,
and will be nonzero if z[-K]b[-K] 0 and there exists b[K] in the conditional support of p3[K] with z[K]b[K] = Z[-K]b[-K], i.e., with zb = O. We thus have that there will be both positive and negative weights on the MTE if there exist values of b

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

736 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL
in the support of 3 with both z[-K]b[-K1 > 0 and zb = 0 values of b in the support of /3 with z[-K]b[-Ki < 0 and
REFERENCES
AHN, H., AND J. L. POWELL (1993): "Semiparametric Estimation of Censored S with a Nonparametric Selection Mechanism," Journal of Econometrics, 58, 3-29
AMEMIYA, T. (1985): Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University ANDREWS, D. W. K., AND M. M. A. SCHAFGANS (1998): "Semiparametric Esti
Intercept of a Sample Selection Model," Review of Economic Studies, 65, 497-517 ANGRIST, J., K. GRADDY, AND G. IMBENS (2000): "The Interpretation of Instrum
Estimators in Simultaneous Equations Models with an Application to the Dem Review of Economic Studies, 67, 499-527. ANGRIST, J., AND A. KRUEGER (1999): "Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics, of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Amsterdam: El
1277-1366.
BJORKLUND, A., AND R. MOFFITT (1987): "The Estimation of Wage Gains and Welfare Gains in Self-Selection Models," Review of Economics and Statistics, 69, 42-49.
CAMPBELL, D. T., AND J. C. STANLEY (1966): Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs fo Research. Skokie, IL: Rand McNally.
CARNEIRO, P., K. HANSEN, AND J. HECKMAN (2003): "Estimating Distributions of Counterfac tuals with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of the Effects of Un certainty on Schooling Choice," International Economic Review, 44, 361-422.
CHEN, X., AND Y. FAN (1999): "Consistent Hypothesis Testing in Semiparametric and Nonparametric Models for Econometric Time Series," Journal of Econometrics, 91, 373-401.
CUNHA, E, J. HECKMAN, AND S. NAVARRO (2005): "Separating Heterogeneity from Uncertaint in Modeling Schooling Choices," Hicks Lecture, Oxford University, April 2004; Oxford Ec nomic Papers, 57, 191-261.
ELLISON, G., AND S. E ELLISON (2000): "A Simple Framework for Nonparametric Specificati Testing," Journal of Econometrics, 96, 1-23.
FLORENS, J.-P., J. HECKMAN, C. MEGHIR, AND E. VYTLACIL (2004): "Instrumental Variabl Local Instrumental Variables, and Control Functions," Unpublished Working Paper, Universit of Chicago.
GHOSAL, S., A. SEN, AND A. VAN DER VAART (2000): "Testing Monotonicity of Regression," The Annals of Statistics, 28, 1054-1082.
GILL, R. D., AND J. M. ROBINS (2001): "Causal Inference for Complex Longitudinal Data: The Continuous Case," The Annals of Statistics, 29, 1-27.
HANSEN, L., AND T. SARGENT (1981): "Linear Rational Expectations Models of Dynamically Interrelated Variables," in Rational Expectations and Econometric Practice, ed. by R. Lucas and T. Sargent. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 127-156.
HECKMAN, J. (1976): "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 5,
475-492.
(1990): "Varieties of Selection Bias," American Economic Review, 80, 313-318. (1997): "Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions Used in Making Program Evaluations," Journal of Human Resources, 32, 441-462. (2001): "Micro Data, Heterogeneity and the Evaluation of Public Policy: Nobel Lecture, Journal of Political Economy, 109, 673-748. HECKMAN, J., H. ICHIMURA, AND P. TODD (1997): "Matching as an Econometric Evaluatio Estimator," Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261-294. HECKMAN, J., H. ICHIMURA, J. SMITH, AND P. TODD (1998): "Characterizing Selection Bias Us ing Experimental Data," Econometrica, 66, 1017-1098.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ECONOMETRIC POLICY EVALUATION 737
HECKMAN, J., R. LALONDE, AND J. SMITH (1999): "The Economics and Labor Market Programs," in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A and D. Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1865-2097.
HECKMAN, J., L. LOCHNER, AND C. TABER (1998): "General Equilib A Study of Tuition Policy," American Economic Review, 88, 381-386.
HECKMAN, J., AND S. NAVARRO-LOZANO (2004): "Using Matching, In Control Functions to Estimate Economic Choice Models," Review of E 86, 30-57.
HECKMAN, J., AND R. ROBB (1985): 'Alternative Methods for Estimating the Impact of Interventions," in Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data, ed. by J. Heckman and B. Singer. New York: Cambridge University Press, 156-245. (1986): "Alternative Methods for Solving the Problem of Selection Bias in Evaluating the Impact of Treatments on Outcomes," in Drawing Inference from Self-Selected Samples, ed. by H. Wainer. New York: Springer-Verlag, 63-107.
HECKMAN, J., J. SMITH, AND C. TABER (1998): "Accounting for Dropouts in Evaluations of Social Programs," Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 1-14.
HECKMAN, J., S. URZUA, AND E. VYTLACIL (2004): "Understanding Instrumental Variables," Review of Economics and Statistics Lecture, Harvard University, April 2001; revised 2004.
HECKMAN, J., AND E. VYTLACIL (1999): "Local Instrumental Variable and Latent Variable Models for Identifying and Bounding Treatment Effects," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 4730-4734. (2001a): "Local Instrumental Variables," in Nonlinear Statistical Modeling: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics: Essays in Honor of TakeshiAmemiya, ed. by C. Hsiao, K. Morimune, and J. Powell. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1-46. (2001b): "Instrumental Variables, Selection Models, and Tight Bounds on the Average Treatment Effect," in Econometric Evaluations ofActive Labor Market Policies in Europe, ed. by M. Lechner and E Pfeiffer, Heidelberg and Berlin: Physica, 1-23. (2005): "Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs," in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 6, ed. by J. Heckman and E. Leamer. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, forthcoming.
HENDRY, D. (1995): Dynamic Econometrics. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press. HuRwIcz, L. (1962): "On the Structural Form of Interdependent Systems," in Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science, ed. by E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 232-239. ICHIMURA, H., AND C. TABER (2002): "Direct Estimation of Policy Impacts," Unpublished Working Paper, Department of Economics, University College London. ICHIMURA, H., AND T. THOMPSON (1998): "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of a Binary Choice Model with Random Coefficients of Unknown Distribution," Journal of Econometrics, 86,
269-295.
IMBENS, G., AND J. ANGRIST (1994): "Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects," Econometrica, 62, 467-475.
IMBENS, G., AND D. RUBIN (1997): "Estimating Outcome Distributions for Compliers in Instrumental Variables Models," Review of Economic Studies, 64, 555-574.
MANSKI, C. (1990): "Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects," American Economic Review, 80, 319-323.
MARSCHAK, J. (1953): "Economic Measurements for Policy and Predictions," in Studies in Econometric Method, ed. by W. C. Hood and T. C. Koopmans, Cowles Commission for Research in Economics Monograph 14. New York: Wiley, 1-26.
MATZKIN, R. (1994): "Restrictions of Economic Theory in Nonparametric Methods," in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4, ed. by R. E Engle and D. McFadden. New York: North-Holland,
2523-2558.
PEARL, J. (2000): Causality. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

738 J. J. HECKMAN AND E. VYTLACIL POWELL, J. L. (1994): "Estimation of Semiparametric Models," in
Vol. 4, ed. by R. E Engle and D. McFadden. New York: North-Hol ROY, A. (1951): "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,"
135-146.
RUDIN, W. (1974): Real and Complex Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill. SMITH, V. K., AND H. S. BANZHAF (2004): '"A Diagrammatic Exposition of Weak Complementar-
ity and the Willig Condition," American Journal ofAgricultural Economics, 86, 455-466. VYTLACIL, E. (2002): "Independence, Monotonicity, and Latent Index Models: An Equivalence
Result," Econometrica, 70, 331-341. (2004): '"A Note on Additive Separability and Latent Index Models of Binary Choice:
Representation Results," Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University. YITZHAKI, S. (1996): "On Using Linear Regression in Welfare Economics," Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics, 14, 478-486. (1999): "The Gini Instrumental Variable, or 'The Double IV Estimator'," Unpublished
Manuscript, Department of Economics, Hebrew University. ZHENG, J. (1996): '"A Consistent Test of Functional Form via Nonparametric Estimation Tech-
niques," Journal of Econometrics, 75, 263-289.
This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 16:03:09 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

