NOTE
WHY DO TOUGHER CASEWORKERS INCREASE EMPLOYMENT?
THE ROLE OF PROGRAM ASSIGNMENT AS A CAUSAL MECHANISM
Martin Huber, Michael Lechner, and Giovanni Mellace*
Abstract—Previous research found that less accommodating caseworkers
are more successful in placing unemployed workers into employment.
This paper explores the causal mechanisms behind this result using semiparametric mediation analysis. Analyzing rich linked job seeker–caseworker
data for Switzerland, we find that the positive employment effects of less
accommodating caseworkers are not driven by a particularly effective
mix of labor market programs but, rather, by other dimensions of the
counseling process, possibly including threats of sanctions and pressure
to accept jobs.

I.

using two different propensity scores: the conditional probabilities of
treatment (a) given covariates and (b) given covariates and mediators.
On the empirical side, we are the first to evaluate the causal mechanisms of caseworkers’ placement success in a mediation framework
using linked survey-administrative data on caseworkers and job
seekers.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the econometric framework. Section III describes the data and
selection issues. Section IV presents the results.

Introduction

C

ASEWORKERS in employment offices usually have dual roles
of job seeker counseling, and monitoring and may differ in performing these tasks. Behncke, Frölich, and Lechner (2010, henceforth
BFL) found for Switzerland that less cooperative caseworkers
increase the reemployment chances of those who are unemployed.
Reconsidering their linked job seeker–caseworker data, this paper
decomposes the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) of
having a less cooperative caseworker into an indirect effect through
the assignment of an active labor market program (ALMP) and a
direct effect comprising all remaining causal mechanisms. That is,
we consider the costly tool of ALMPs as an explicit mediator of caseworkers’ counseling style.1 Applying a sequential conditional independence assumption and propensity score matching, our findings
suggest that the total effect is driven by channels other than program
participation, which increase employment by initially roughly 1.5
percentage points, though the effect levels off over time. In contrast,
the indirect path is never economically or statistically significant,
such that the success of noncooperative caseworkers apparently does
not come from more effective ALMPs.
The literature on direct and indirect effects or mediation analysis
(see Baron & Kenny, 1986) has recently moved toward flexible modeling (see, e.g., Flores & Flores-Lagunes, 2009; Imai, Keele, &
Yamamoto, 2010; Huber, 2014). As a methodological contribution,
we propose a propensity score matching approach for estimating
direct and indirect effects on the treated based on two matching steps
Received for publication December 5, 2014. Revision accepted for publication February 5, 2016. Editor: Bryan S. Graham.
* Huber: University of Fribourg; Lechner: University of St. Gallen,
CEPR and PSI, CESIfo, IAB, and IZA; Mellace: University of Southern
Denmark.
We have benefited from comments by the editor, Bryan Graham; Judea
Pearl; seminar/conference participants at the Universities of Melbourne,
Sydney, Otago, Copenhagen, Madrid (Carlos III), the EALE conference
in Ljubljana, the workshop on Applied Microeconomics in Odense, the
COMPIE conference in Rome, and the IAAE meeting in Thessaloniki; as
well as three anonymous referees. Financial support from the Swiss
National Science Foundation, grant SNF 100018_137769 for the project
‘‘Identifying causal mechanisms in empirical economics’’ is gratefully
acknowledged.
A supplemental appendix is available online at http://www.mitpress
journals.org/doi/suppl/10.1162/REST_a_00632.
1
In 2003, training programs cost on average 110 CHF per person and
day (plus additional expenses of 11 CHF for, traveling, for example),
employment programs 98 CHF (plus 12 CHF). See Lalive, Zehnder, and
Zweimüller (2006).

II.

Econometric Framework

A. Potential Outcomes and Different Causal Effects
We aim at disentangling the effect of a binary treatment (D) on
some outcome (Y) into a direct effect and an indirect effect operating
through a possibly multidimensional mediator (M). We denote by
Y(d) and M(d) the potential outcome and mediator states under treatment d 2 f1; 0g and by DD¼1 ¼ E½Yð1Þ  Yð0ÞjD ¼ 1 the ATET. To
disentangle DD¼1 , rewrite the potential outcome as a function of both
the treatment and the mediator: Y(d) ¼ Y(d,M(d)). This allows formulating the direct effect (hD¼1 ðdÞ)—the fraction of the total effect that
is not attributed to the mediator—and the indirect effect (dD¼1 ðdÞ)—
the fraction attributed to the mediator, on the treated population:2
hD¼1 ðdÞ ¼ E½Yð1; MðdÞÞ  Yð0; MðdÞÞjD ¼ 1;
dD¼1 ðdÞ ¼ E½Yðd; Mð1ÞÞ  Yðd; Mð0ÞÞjD ¼ 1; d 2 f1; 0g:

(1)

Concerning the direct effect, Vansteelandt and VanderWeele
(2012) argue that focusing on Mð1Þ appears to be the natural reference for treated subjects when the choice of reference levels is a
priori hard to justify, because Mð1Þ corresponds to the actual choice
of the treated:
hD¼1 ð1Þ ¼ E½Yð1; Mð1ÞÞ  Yð0; Mð1ÞÞjD ¼ 1
¼ E½Y  Yð0; Mð1ÞÞjD ¼ 1:

(2)

Because the ATET is the sum of the direct and indirect effects defined
on opposite treatment states,
DD¼1 ¼ E½Yð1; Mð1ÞÞ  Yð0; Mð1ÞÞjD ¼ 1 þ E½Yð0; Mð1ÞÞ
 Yð0; Mð0ÞÞjD ¼ 1 ¼ hD¼1 ð1Þ þ dD¼1 ð0Þ;
the indirect effect dD¼1 ð0Þ corresponds to the difference between the
ATET and hD¼1 ð1Þ:
dD¼1 ð0Þ ¼ DD¼1  hD¼1 ð1Þ ¼ E½Yð0; Mð1ÞÞ  Yð0; Mð0ÞÞjD ¼ 1:
(3)

2

Robins and Greenland (1992) and Pearl (2001) use the denomination
pure/total and natural direct and indirect effects, respectively.

The Review of Economics and Statistics, March 2017, 99(1): 180–183
Ó 2017 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
doi:10.1162/REST_a_00632

NOTE
In this paper, we therefore aim at identifying and estimating equations
(2) and (3).3
B. Identifying Assumptions and Estimation
We impose sequential conditional independence of the treatment
and the mediator:4
Assumption 1: fYð0; mÞ; Mð0Þg
common support.

‘

DjX ¼ x for all m and x in the

Assumption 1 states that the joint distribution of the potential outcomes (for any m) and mediators under nontreatment are independent
of the treatment conditional on X. This rules out unobserved confounders affecting the treatment, on the one hand, and the potential outcome and/or mediator under D ¼ 0, on the other hand, after controlling for observables.
‘
Assumption 2: Yð0; mÞ MjX ¼ x; D ¼ d for all m, d, and x in the
common support.
By assumption 2, the potential outcome under nontreatment and
the observed mediator are independent conditional on the covariates
and the treatment.5 This implies that Y(0,m) is conditionally independent of (the common-world state) M(0) whenever D ¼ 0 and of (the
cross-world state) M(1) whenever D ¼ 1.
Assumption 3: PrðD ¼ 1jM; XÞ < 1.
By assumption 3, there exists no combination of M, X that predicts
treatment receipt with probability 1.
Theorem 1: Under assumptions 1 to 3, the following equalities hold:
E½Yð0; Mð1ÞÞjD ¼ 1 ¼

E ½E½YjM; X; D ¼ 0;

(4)

181
TABLE 1.—SURVEY QUESTION ON COOPERATIVENESS OF THE CASEWORKER

How important do you consider the cooperation with the job seeker regarding
placements and assignment of active labor market programs?
&
1. Cooperation is very important; the wishes of the unemployed person
should be satisfied.
&
2. Cooperation is important, but placements and ALMP should sometimes
be assigned or declined in spite of unemployed person’s wishes.
&
3. Cooperation is less important; I should assign placements and
ALMP independent of the wishes of the unemployed person
Fifty-two percent of the caseworkers chose option 1, 39% chose option 2, and 9% chose option 3. Only
very few caseworkers did not respond to this question. They are dropped from the analysis.

pmx ðM; XÞ ¼ PrðD ¼ 1jM; XÞ and px ðXÞ ¼ PrðD ¼ 1jXÞ, which balance the distributions of (M, X) and X, respectively:6
hD¼1 ð1Þ ¼ E½YjD ¼ 1 
dD¼ 1ð0Þ ¼

E

½E½Yjpmx ðM; XÞ; D ¼ 0;

pmx ðM;XÞjD¼1

½E½Yjpmx ðM; XÞ; D ¼ 0

E

pmx ðM;XÞjD¼1



E

px ðXÞjD¼1

½E½Yjpx ðXÞ; D ¼ 0:

We therefore propose estimating the direct and indirect effects by
propensity score–based matching of nontreated observations to the
treated using (a) the estimated pmx ðM; XÞ to obtain an estimate of
hD¼1 ð1Þ and (b) the estimated px ðXÞ to estimate the ATET from
which the direct effect is subtracted to estimate dD¼1 ð0Þ.7
We use distance-weighted radius matching on the propensity score
with bias adjustment (see Lechner, Miquel, & Wunsch, 2011) and model
px ðXÞ and pmx ðM; XÞ by flexible probit specifications. Concerning inference, we apply block bootstrapping and (a) resample caseworkers along
with their job seekers to account for clustering, (b) compute the bootstrap t-statistics of the effects, and (c) estimate the p-value as the
smoothed share of absolute bootstrap t-statistics that exceeds the absolute t-statistic in the original sample (see Racine & MacKinnon, 2007).

M;XjD¼1

E½Yð0; Mð0ÞÞjD ¼ 1 ¼ E ½E½YjX; D ¼ 0;

(5)

III.

Empirical Implementation

XjD¼1

with E ½C denoting the expectation of C taken over the distribution

A. Study Sample and Definition of Treatment, Mediators,
and Outcomes

AjB¼b

of A conditional on B ¼ b. Thus, hD¼1 ð1Þ and dD¼1 ð0Þ are identified.
Proof. See online appendix A.
Our theorem 1 and its proof are similar to theorem 1 of Imai et al.
(2010), albeit the latter focus on the total population, while we consider the treated. Instead of conditioning on M and X as in equations
(4) and (5), the results of Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) imply that
identification is also obtained conditional on the propensity scores
3
The question asked by focusing on equations (2) and (3) is, ‘‘To which
extent do the noncooperative caseworkers’ current ALMP strategies and
other mechanisms contribute to the overall effect?’’ This is different from,
‘‘How effective are specific combinations of caseworker types and programs, given that policymakers may prescribe either?’’ which may be
addressed by multiple or dynamic treatment evaluation (see, e.g., Imbens,
2000, and Lechner, 2009). Answering the first question explores the causal mechanisms underlying the status quo, while answering the second
may help improve on the status quo.
4
Our identifying assumptions differ from those of Vansteelandt and
VanderWeele (2012), who allow for confounding of M but impose stronger assumptions on the potential outcomes.
5
Our assumptions require that Y(0, M(1)) and Y(0, M(0)) take the same
value whenever M(1) ¼ M(0). This would be violated if the actual content of a formally identical ALMP differed across D conditional on X.

The study sample comprises individuals who registered at Swiss
employment offices in 2003. Our administrative data include, among
others, nationality, qualification, education, experience, profession,
and industry of last job; participation in ALMPs; employment histories; and regional characteristics. They were linked to a caseworker
survey on aims, strategies, and processes of employment offices and
caseworkers. The sample definition follows BFL (see appendix B.1)
and ultimately contains 1,284 caseworkers and 100,120 unemployed.
The survey contained a question on the importance of cooperation
with the job seeker (see table 1).8 As in BFL, the treatment (D) is 1 if
‘
‘
6
Specifically, X Djpx ðXÞ¼px ðxÞ and ðM;XÞ Djpmx ðM;XÞ¼pmx ðm;xÞ
for all m, x in the common support.
7
Without interactions between D and M in the outcome model, the
indirect effect could alternatively be identified as the effect of D on M
multiplied with the effect of M on Y. This approach could incorporate
posttreatment confounders influenced by D that affect both M and Y.
There thus exists a trade-off between model flexibility and allowing for
posttreatment confounding; see, e.g., Imai and Yamamoto (2013).
8
According to the survey, noncooperative caseworkers consider control
and sanctions, job assignments, and employment programs as more
important and counseling meetings and temporary wage subsidies as less
important. They also mentioned assigning ALMPs to exert pressure and
control their clients’ availability for jobs.

182

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS
FIGURE 1.—EFFECTS ON EMPLOYMENT BY MONTH AFTER REGISTRATION
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
-0.005

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36

-0.010
Total eﬀect

Direct eﬀect

Indirect eﬀect

A route/triangle/circle implies pointwise significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

the caseworker chose option 2 or 3 (is less cooperative) and 0 otherwise.9 The mediator (M) is the first participation in an ALMP within six
months after starting the unemployment spell. We categorize ALMPs in
six mutually exclusive groups: job search training, personality course,
language skill training, computer training, vocational training, and participation in an employment program or internship. Together with nonparticipation, this entails seven possible mediator states. Estimation is
based on six dummies for each ALMP being the first program in 2003.
Table B2.1 in appendix B.2 provides the frequencies of ALMPs across
treatment states.
The outcome (Y) is a binary employment indicator on monthly
bases. An individual is considered employed if she has deregistered at
the employment office and the exit state is employment. As the mediator causally precedes the outcome, we consider only employment
states assessed from month 8 after caseworker assignment (at least
one month after program start). At least 29 outcome periods are available. At the latest, job seekers are assigned to a caseworker in the end
of 2003 so that the mediators are measured from the beginning until
the first half of 2004 and the outcome from the second half of 2004
until the end of in 2006. We therefore estimate the effects over a period of 1.5 to 3 years after caseworker assignment.
B. Selectivity of the Treatment and the Mediators
Our strategy requires observing all confounders of the relationship
of the outcome with both the treatment or the mediator, or both (conditional on treatment). BFL argue that treatment selection depends on
the types of hired caseworkers, the assignment of unemployed to
caseworkers, and the development of the caseworkers’ attitudes as
they gain work experience. As attitudes may be related to job placement success, we control for caseworker characteristics like age, gender, education, work experience, and own unemployment experience.
We also control for rules assigning the unemployed to caseworkers,
as stated in the survey. Furthermore, caseworkers may react differently to various types of unemployed and the labor market environment. Therefore, we include a range of job seeker characteristics like
gender, qualification, previous occupation, labor market history, and
a caseworker-provided employability rating, as well as local labor
market conditions.
Nevertheless, some individual characteristics, like skills not
reflected in qualifications, attitude, and motivation, are unobserved
9
The self-reported treatment may contain measurement error with
respect to actual cooperativeness. For instance, some caseworkers might
state being (non)cooperative but act differently in practice, and this may
be correlated with unobserved characteristics like personal integrity that
also affect the outcomes. We nevertheless believe that the measurement
error is limited because there are no obvious incentives for misreporting
(like justification bias).

but arguably associated with observables. For instance, motivation
should correlate with the labor market history and the employability
rating (which should furthermore also capture unobserved skills). We
therefore believe that conditional on observables, variation in the
assignment of caseworker types is likely exogenous and, for instance,
related to the current availability and work load of caseworkers.
Characteristics that have been identified as controls for caseworker
cooperativeness are also expected to influence selection into the programs. As Gerfin and Lechner (2002) and many others argued, the
assignment of ALMPs is likely driven by the job seeker’s socioeconomic background, previous occupation and labor market experience,
employability, and regional characteristics. In addition, caseworker
characteristics might affect the assignment strategy. Conditional on
these factors, exogenous variation in ALMPs likely comes from differences in their availability across employment offices. Finally, it is
worth noting that program assignment usually takes place early in the
unemployment spell, so that time-varying confounding of the mediators due to changes in relevant factors during the unemployment spell
is likely a minor issue. The fact that we use a (short) six-month window for program start is also in favor of this argument.
Table B.2.2 in appendix B.2 provides descriptive statistics for a
range of confounders by treatment and program status. While there is
limited selection with respect to caseworker rigor, perhaps with the
exception of regional aspects, selection into the programs is much
stronger and driven by several factors. (See also table B.3 of appendix
B.3 for the propensity score specifications.) Appendix C contains tests
for whether the propensity scores balance the characteristics of treated and nontreated in matching estimation (tables C.1 and C.2) and
suggest that balancing works well.
IV.

Results

Figure 1 contains the ATET as well as the direct and indirect
effects among the treated on employment from month 8 to 36. The
three lines represent the total, direct, and indirect effects, and superimposed symbols imply that these particular effects are (pointwise)
significant at the indicated level.10 The results suggest that initially,
less cooperative caseworkers significantly increase employment by
roughly 1.5 percentage points. Over time, however, the ATET
vanishes and is not statistically significant after month 14, even
though it remains positive in almost all months. The (initial) employment gain is mainly driven by the direct effect of caseworker rigor,
although the indirect mechanism through ALMPs is never significant.
Our estimates therefore suggest that the (at least initially) higher
job placement rates of less cooperative caseworkers are not due to
10
Appendix D provides the results for the outcomes unemployment
with benefit receipt and looking for a job.

NOTE
better programs but to other dimensions that possibly include the
threat of sanctions11 or pressure to go to job interviews. This suggests
that policymakers should be interested not only in the effective provision of ALMPs but also in the analysis of other dimensions of caseworkers’ counseling style, which can apparently make a difference.

11
We observe actual sanctioning days but do not find any economically
or statistically significant effect of counseling style on sanctioning. Cooperative and noncooperative caseworkers could nevertheless differ in terms
of the (unobserved) threat of sanctions, which may also affect employment.

REFERENCES
Baron, R. M., and D. A. Kenny, ‘‘The Moderator-Mediator Variable Distinction in Social Psychological Research: Conceptual, Strategic,
and Statistical Considerations,’’ Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 51 (1986), 1173–1182.
Behncke, S., M. Frölich, and M. Lechner, ‘‘Unemployed and Their Caseworkers: Should They Be Friends or Foes?’’ Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series A 173 (2010), 67–92.
Flores, C. A., and A. Flores-Lagunes, ‘‘Identification and Estimation of
Causal Mechanisms and Net Effects of a Treatment under Unconfoundedness,’’ IZA discussion paper 4237 (2009).
Gerfin, M., and M. Lechner, ‘‘Microeconometric Evaluation of the Active
Labour Market Policy in Switzerland,’’ Economic Journal 112
(2002), 854–893.
Huber, M., ‘‘Identifying Causal Mechanisms (Primarily) Based on Inverse
Probability Weighting,’’ Journal of Applied Econometrics 29
(2014), 920–943.

183

Imai, K., L. Keele, and T. Yamamoto, ‘‘Identification, Inference and Sensitivity Analysis for Causal Mediation Effects,’’ Statistical Science
25 (2010), 51–71.
Imai, K., and T. Yamamoto, ‘‘Identification and Sensitivity Analysis for
Multiple Causal Mechanisms: Revisiting Evidence from Framing
Experiments,’’ Political Analysis 21 (2013), 141–171.
Imbens, G. W., ‘‘The Role of the Propensity Score in Estimating DoseResponse Functions,’’ Biometrika 87 (2000), 706–710.
Lalive, R., T. Zehnder, and J. Zweimüller, ‘‘Makroökonomische Evaluation der Aktiven Arbeitsmarktpolitik der Schweiz’’ Swiss Federal
Department of Economics publication in labour market policy 19
(2006).
Lechner, M., ‘‘Sequential Causal Models for the Evaluation of Labor
Market Program,’’ Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 27
(2009), 71–83.
Lechner, M., R. Miquel, and C. Wunsch, ‘‘Long-Run Effects of Public
Sector Sponsored Training in West Germany,’’ Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (2011), 742–784.
Pearl, J., ‘‘Direct and Indirect Effects’’ (pp. 411–420), in Proceedings of
the Seventeenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 2001).
Racine, J. S., and J. G. MacKinnon, ‘‘Inference via Kernel Smoothing of
Bootstrap Values,’’ Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 51
(2007), 5949–5957.
Robins, J. M., and S. Greenland, ‘‘Identifiability and Exchangeability
for Direct and Indirect Effects,’’ Epidemiology 3 (1992), 143–
155.
Rosenbaum, P., and D. B. Rubin, ‘‘The Central Role of the Propensity
Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,’’ Biometrika 70
(1983), 41–55.
Vansteelandt, S., and T. J. VanderWeele, ‘‘Natural Direct and Indirect
Effects on the Exposed: Effect Decomposition under Weaker
Assumptions,’’ Biometrics 68 (2012), 1019–1027.

