J. R. Statist. Soc. A (2018)
181, Part 2, pp. 441–463

Direct and indirect effects of training vouchers for
the unemployed
Martin Huber
University of Fribourg, Switzerland

and Michael Lechner and Anthony Strittmatter
University of St Gallen, Switzerland
[Received September 2015. Final revision February 2017]
Summary. The paper evaluates the effects of awarding vouchers for vocational training on the
employment outcomes of unemployed voucher recipients in Germany, as well as the potential
mechanism through which they operate. This study assesses the direct effects of voucher assignment net of actual redemption, which may be driven by preference shaping and learning
about possible human capital investments or simply by the costs of information gathering. Using
a formal mediation analysis framework based on sequential conditional independence assumptions and semiparametric matching estimators, our results suggest that the negative short-term
and positive long-term employment effects of receiving a voucher are mainly driven by actual
training participation. However, the direct effect of just obtaining a voucher is negative over the
short run as well. This result points to potential losses in the effectiveness of such training provision systems if individuals decide not to redeem vouchers, as the chances of employment are
lower than under non-award over the short run and under redemption over the long run, which
makes non-redemption the least attractive option.
Keywords: Causal channels; Causal mechanisms; Direct effects; Indirect effects; Matching
estimation; Mediation analysis; Training programmes; Voucher award

1.

Introduction

In January 2003, the German Federal Employment Agency reformed the allocation of vocational training programmes, which are a cornerstone of Germany’s active labour market policies
(ALMPs). An assignment system based on vouchers replaced the direct assignment of unemployed individuals to vocational training by caseworkers. The vouchers certify eligibility for
fully funded vocational training. The aims of the reform were to increase the involvement of
training participants in the training decision and to increase competition between training
providers. Before the reform, caseworkers determined placement into vocational training. Since
the reform, unemployed workers receive vouchers and select, with a few restrictions, both training providers and courses. The redemption decision is made solely by the awardee. Caseworkers
are not allowed to inﬂuence the decision of awardees.
This paper contributes to the literature estimating the effects of publicly sponsored training
programmes. This is a mature literature and many high level studies exist on this topic; see, for
example, the meta-analyses by Card et al. (2010, 2015). Our contribution to this literature is to
investigate the labour market effects of vocational training, as well as the potential mechanisms
Address for correspondence: Michael Lechner, Department of Economics, Swiss Institute for Empirical Economic Research, University of St Gallen, Varnbüelstrasse 14, CH-9000 St Gallen, Switzerland.
E-mail: Michael.Lechner@unisg.ch
© 2017 Royal Statistical Society

0964–1998/18/181441

442

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

through which these effects might operate. Speciﬁcally, we investigate whether in addition to
the voucher’s effect through its redemption (i.e. participation in vocational training) there is
a direct effect of the voucher award (i.e. without participation). The latter may be driven by
motivational effects, preference shaping and salience or awareness regarding (the availability
of) ALMPs, which could affect labour market behaviour.
Such effects would be in line with Van den Berg et al. (2009), who documented that the subjective individual expectation to be assigned to an ALMP affects job search behaviour. Further,
Crépon et al. (2014) reported that the mere notiﬁcation of a planned training assignment has
effects on the unemployment exit probability. In a related endeavour, Crossley et al. (2014) documented that mere exposure to speciﬁc questions in a survey can alter subsequent behaviour.
Exploiting randomized assignment to survey modules within the ‘Longitudinal Internet studies for the social sciences’ panel survey, they found that households answering questions on
expenditures and needs in retirement signiﬁcantly changed their non-housing saving rates.
They argued that the survey may have acted as a salience shock and comparable effects might
occur from being offered a training voucher, as this might induce individuals to become aware
of and to reﬂect on the ALMPs and their expected effects.
For instance, the award of a voucher could increase awareness of and preferences for
possibilities to build up human capital and therefore immediately reduce job search intensity. The same effect occurs if awarding a voucher leads to high information costs of looking
for appropriate providers and courses. In contrast, if participation in ALMPs is perceived as
a burden or as ineffective in raising employability or if a voucher award increases the salience
or awareness of potential obligations to participate in future (unattractive) ALMPs, then an
immediate increase in job search intensity might be expected. Therefore, it appears to be an
interesting and open issue whether the effect of receiving a voucher is solely rooted in its actual
use or whether a direct effect whose direction is a priori ambiguous exists as well. In particular,
this allows us to determine whether it is the quality of the training providers that drives the
voucher effect (through voucher redemption), or whether other dimensions are also important.
We use a formal mediation framework (see, for instance, the seminal paper by Baron and
Kenny (1986)) to identify these speciﬁc causal mechanisms and, for this, we consider the redemption of a voucher as a mediator, i.e. an intermediate outcome on the causal path from the voucher
award to the individual labour market outcomes. In addition to the effect of voucher redemption, we are particularly interested in the so-called controlled direct effect (see, for instance, Pearl
(2001)), i.e. the employment effect of a voucher award in the absence of actual redemption. (We
refer to Pearl (2001) for a discussion of the differences between controlled and natural direct effects.) However, causal mechanisms are not easily identiﬁed. Even if the vouchers were randomly
assigned, this would not imply randomness of the mediator (see Robins and Greenland (1992)).
(This issue has also been discussed in the context of randomized training programmes; see, for
instance, Ham and Lalonde (1996), who noted that, even under the randomization of training,
conditioning on a mediator such as employment introduces selection bias when assessing the
effects on wages or duration outcomes (e.g. the length of a post-treatment employment spell).)
To tackle the endogeneity of voucher award and redemption, a particular conditional
independence assumption is invoked for identiﬁcation. It requires
(a) that the voucher award is independent of potential employment outcomes (under (non-)
award and (non-)redemption of the vouchers) conditional on observed covariates and
(b) that voucher redemption is independent of the potential outcomes conditional on the
covariates and voucher award.
These assumptions are related to those invoked in the non-parametric mediation literature for

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

443

identifying controlled direct effects (see, for instance, Petersen et al. (2006) and VanderWeele
(2009)). They also appear in the dynamic treatment effects literature on assessing sequences
of treatments (see, for instance, Robins (1986, 1987a, b, c, 1989), Robins et al. (2000), Lechner
(2009) and Lechner and Miquel (2010)), as well as in the multiple-treatment-effects framework
(see Imbens (2000) and Lechner (2001)). For estimation, we use semiparametric radius matching
with bias adjustment (Lechner et al., 2011) based on the propensity score capturing the probability of (joint) voucher award and redemption conditional on covariates.
The results suggest that, among voucher recipients, a voucher award has a negative average
(total) employment effect in the ﬁrst 3 years after voucher receipt. It has a small positive effect
thereafter, with an increased employment probability of approximately 2–3 percentage points
throughout the fourth year after receiving the voucher. Thus, the initial negative lock-in effect of
a voucher award (probably due to decreased job search intensity) is offset by higher probabilities
of employment in later periods. Concerning the causal mechanisms, voucher redemption (and,
thus, actual participation in vocational training) has similar slightly more pronounced, negative short-term and positive long-term effects to those of voucher award. Therefore, voucher
redemption primarily drives the total effect on voucher recipients.
In contrast, the direct effect on voucher recipients, i.e. the differences in mean potential
outcomes between voucher award and non-redemption and non-award (and non-redemption)
is small and insigniﬁcant during most of the fourth year. Therefore, over the long run, mere
voucher receipt does not affect employment (e.g. through a change in preferences). Nevertheless,
a negative direct effect appears over the ﬁrst 3 years, suggesting that voucher award decreases
job search intensity despite non-redemption. This points to potential losses in effectiveness of
voucher award systems if individuals do not redeem their vouchers, as the chances of employment
are lower than under non-award over the short run and under redemption over the long run.
Therefore, voucher award and non-redemption appear to be the least attractive option. This
ﬁnding is important when designing voucher award systems.
The main contribution of this study is to disentangle the causal mechanisms of an ALMP
based on voucher awards rather than to assess merely the total (gross) effect of the programme. Therefore, this research goes beyond Doerr et al. (2016) and Heinrich et al. (2010), who
evaluated the effectiveness of various vocational training programmes in voucher systems but
did not consider the direct effect of voucher award. It also differs from Doerr and Strittmatter (2016) and Rinne et al. (2013), who compared the effectiveness of vocational training via
voucher and mandatory assignment regimes but did not separate award and redemption effects.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional
background of voucher awards in Germany for ALMPs. Section 3 presents the econometric
framework, namely the deﬁnitions of the effects of interest, the identifying assumptions and
the estimator that was used. Section 4 introduces the data. In Section 5, we provide descriptive
statistics and discuss the plausibility of the identifying assumptions. Section 6 presents the
estimation results. Section 7 concludes. The on-line appendices A–F provide further details on
data, estimation and results.
The programs that were used to analyse the data in the paper can be obtained from
http://wileyonline.library.com/journal/rss-datasets
2.

Institutional background of voucher provision

Vocational training programmes constitute a cornerstone of ALMPs in Germany. Their main
objective is to adjust the skills of unemployed individuals to changing requirements of the labour

444

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

market and/or to changing individual conditions. Essentially, there are three types of vocational
training course: classic vocational training, training in so-called practice ﬁrms and retraining.
Examples are courses in information-technology-based accounting or customer orientation and
sales. Training in practice ﬁrms aims at simulating (real) work environments. Retraining courses
have longer durations of up to 3 years with the goal of completing a vocational degree within
the German apprenticeship system. They cover, for example, a full curriculum of vocational
training for a care nurse for the elderly. Vocational training is organized either in classrooms or
on the job. The curriculum may also include internships. The exact course format depends on
the type of training. Practice ﬁrm training typically takes place in artiﬁcial ‘training’ companies.
Retraining for occupations within the dual apprenticeship system (e.g. service managers) usually
takes place on the job but can also involve classroom sessions. Between 2000 and 2002, average
annual expenditures for vocational training exceeded C 7 billion (source: labour market reports,
Federal Employment Agency of Germany).
In January 2003, a voucher-based allocation system for the provision of vocational training
was introduced. It aims at promoting the responsibility of training participants and introducing
market mechanisms among training providers. Potential training participants receive vocational
training vouchers, which allow them to choose training providers and courses. As explained
in Doerr and Strittmatter (2014), several rules apply. First, the voucher speciﬁes the objective, content and maximum duration of the course. Second, it can only be redeemed within a
1-day commuting zone. (For a training course lasting 6 or more h per day, commuting times of
up to 2.5 h are reasonable. For a training course lasting less than 6 h per day, the reasonable
commuting time is reduced to 2 h.) Third, the training vouchers are valid for a period ranging
between 1 week and 3 months. Fourth, no sanctions or penalties are imposed on the recipient
(such as reduced unemployment beneﬁts) for non-redemption.
The voucher award in the period considered was based on a statistical selection rule.
Caseworkers were to award vouchers to unemployed workers who had at least a 70% probability of ﬁnding new employment within 6 months after ﬁnishing a training programme.
Because our data are extracted from administrative records, we observe the individual
characteristics and the regional labour market conditions that caseworkers used to predict the
chances of employment. In addition, caseworkers had the opportunity to use information from
mandatory counselling interviews and sometimes had access to test results from medical or
psychological services (later, we control for motivation and health problems by means of proxy
variables). Nevertheless, to predict employment outcomes 6 months after training, particularly for training programmes with long durations, remains difﬁcult. There were probably
regional differences in the way that predictions were formed. Doerr and Kruppe (2015)
conducted a survey of caseworkers to analyse regional differences in voucher award intensities. They found that such differences can be (partly) explained by the preferences and sentiments of caseworkers and managers at local employment agencies regarding the use of training
vouchers.
Caseworkers were not allowed to sanction unemployed workers who did not redeem vouchers.
However, the unemployed worker had to provide a reasonable explanation for non-redemption.
This might have caused a mental burden for the unemployed and may be one reason why the
direct voucher effect on leaving the labour force is positive. Nevertheless, non-redeemers could
receive a second voucher if they remained unemployed, but they did not have any legal claim.
The award of a second voucher is based on the same selection rules as for the ﬁrst voucher, but
the ﬁnal award decision is left to the discretion of the caseworkers. We do not analyse second
vouchers because of this more involved dynamic selection procedure. In our data, we observe
that 11% of redeemers and 22% of non-redeemers received a second voucher at a later time. For

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

445

training sequences, caseworkers may have awarded a voucher for each course or only a single
voucher, which certiﬁes eligibility for the whole sequences.
Crépon et al. (2014) found a negative effect of a notiﬁcation of possible training on exits from
unemployment. Because notiﬁed unemployed people must search for an appropriate course
on their own, this notiﬁcation has many similarities to a voucher award. However, Crépon
et al. (2014) analysed a French programme that differs in several dimensions from the German
vocational training vouchers that we analyse. In particular, the notiﬁed unemployed workers
must apply for funding for their training after receiving a notiﬁcation. This differs from the
German voucher system, which guarantees payment for the training and extends the duration
of unemployment beneﬁt payments. The French system involves compulsory counselling with
the caseworker every 6 months. Caseworkers might align the notiﬁed unemployed person to
a training provider, which is not allowed in the German vocational training system. Finally,
Crépon et al. (2014) investigated the hazard rate for leaving unemployment, whereas we focus
directly on different employment, unemployment and earnings outcomes.

3.

Econometric framework

3.1. Potential outcomes and causal effects
Let D denote a binary indicator for voucher award, the so-called treatment variable, and Y the
labour market outcome of interest, e.g. employment. Furthermore, let M be a binary indicator
for voucher redemption (which implies participation in vocational training), which is supposedly the major mediator through which D affects Y . To deﬁne the effects of interest, we use
the potential outcome framework (e.g. Rubin (1974)). Here Y d denotes the potential outcome
as a function of voucher award d ∈ {1, 0}. (By deﬁning the potential outcomes this way, we
implicitly impose the stable unit treatment value assumption; see Rubin (1980).) The average
treatment effect on the treated (ATET) of a voucher award is given by Δ = E.Y 1 − Y 0 |D = 1/.
To investigate the distinct causal mechanisms, Y d,m denotes the potential outcome as a function of both voucher award and redemption, d, m ∈ {1, 0}. Note that the two ways of denoting
d
potential outcomes are linked: Y d = Y d,M , where M d is the potential redemption state under
voucher award D = d. Therefore, the ATET may be expressed as
1

0

Δ = E.Y 1,M − Y 0,M |D = 1/:

.1/

In our application, M 0 = 0 for everyone because vouchers cannot be redeemed if not awarded, so
1
Δ = E.Y 1,M − Y 0,0 |D = 1/. In contrast, M 1 might be either 1 or 0, depending on whether an individual redeems a received voucher. Thus, the ATET provides the total effect of an award, which
may operate indirectly through actual redemption (given that M d changes with the value of d for
at least some individuals) or directly without redemption. (It is worth noting that the mediation
framework has some resemblance to the literature on instrumental variables (IVs), as an instrument affects the outcome via an endogenous intermediate variable, which is usually the actual
treatment of interest. However, an important distinction is that, in the IV context, a direct effect
of the instrument on the outcome is ruled out through the exclusion restriction. IVs may therefore be regarded as a special case of a mediation framework in which direct effects are excluded
by assumption. Also note that the ‘intention-to-treat’ effect in the IV literature also corresponds
to the total causal effect of the instrument in the mediation literature and to the IV’s indirect
effect (as the total effect corresponds to the indirect effect in the absence of a direct effect).)
The extended notation allows further deﬁnitions of parameters, e.g. the average effect of
voucher award and redemption versus no award and no redemption among voucher recipients:

446

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

θ = E.Y 1,1 − Y 0,0 |D = 1/:

.2/

The difference from the ATET is that, in model (2), the redemption status is ‘forced’ to cor1
respond to the voucher award status. This means that Y 1,M measures the potential outcome
under voucher award and a mixture of redemption and non-redemption, whereas Y 1,1 measures
the potential outcome under voucher award and redemption (i.e. voucher and redemption statuses are ‘forced’ to be equal for this potential outcome). Only in the special case of perfect
compliance, i.e. everyone’s redemption decision corresponds to the voucher award (i.e. M d = d
for d ∈ {1, 0}/, is θ = Δ. Again, part or all of the effect might be due to redemption or to a direct
award effect. In the next step, we disentangle these two components and consider the so-called
controlled direct effect (see, for instance Pearl (2001)):
γ = E.Y 1,0 − Y 0,0 |D = 1/:

.3/

(A related parameter is the so-called natural direct effect in the nomenclature of Pearl (2001)
or the pure or total direct effect in the nomenclature of Robins and Greenland (1992) and
Robins (2003), which is deﬁned on potential mediator states rather than prescribed mediator
1
1
0
0
values: E.Y 1,M − Y 0,M |D = 1/ and E.Y 1,M − Y 0,M |D = 1/. These two parameters and γ are
equivalent only in the cases where there are no interaction effects between D and M on the
outcome Y (such that the effect of M does not depend on D, and vice versa). Identiﬁcation
and estimation of natural direct effects have been considered in Pearl (2001), Robins (2003),
Flores and Flores-Lagunes (2009), Imai et al. (2010) and Huber (2014), among many others.)
This is the effect of training voucher award among voucher recipients net of actual redemption, i.e. under prescribed non-redemption for everyone. Finally, the effect of redemption is
identiﬁed by
δ = E.Y 1,1 − Y 1,0 |D = 1/:

.4/

Here, the effect of redemption versus non-redemption is investigated conditionally on awarding
a voucher. Note that γ and δ sum to θ, which can be seen by adding and subtracting Y 1,0 in the
expectation of expression (2).
3.2. Identifying assumptions
To identify the effects of interest, we impose (sequential) conditional independence of the
potential outcomes on the one hand and voucher award and redemption on the other hand
(assumptions 1 and 2 below). This requires that we observe all factors that are jointly related
(a) with D and the potential outcomes and
(b) with M and the potential outcomes.
We henceforth denote the vector of observed covariates by X. Furthermore, a particular common support restriction is needed (assumption 3 below), implying that suitable comparisons in
terms of X exist across various combinations of D and M.
Assumption 1. {Y 1,1 , Y 1,0 , Y 0,0 } ⊥⊥ D|X = x for all x in the support of X.
Assumption 1 states that the potential outcomes are jointly independent of a voucher award
conditional on X. It rules out unobserved confounders that affect both the award and the outcome after controlling for the covariates. It is sufﬁcient for identifying the ATET (in combination
with the ﬁrst part of assumption 3 below). In contrast, the identiﬁcation of θ, γ and δ requires
a further conditional independence assumption.

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

447

Assumption 2. {Y 1,1 , Y 1,0 , Y 0,0 } ⊥⊥ M|X = x, D = d for d ∈ {1, 0} and all x in the support of X.
Under assumption 2, redemption is independent of the potential outcomes conditional on
the covariates and voucher award, which rules out unobserved confounders of the mediator and
the outcome.
Assumptions 1 and 2 are closely related to conditions (4) and (5) in Petersen et al. (2006)
for the identiﬁcation of the controlled direct effect. They are also related to conditions (1)
and (2) in VanderWeele (2009) for identifying the controlled direct effect, and conditions (a)
and (b) of the weak dynamic conditional independence assumption in Lechner (2009) and
Lechner and Miquel (2010) evaluating dynamic treatments. The difference is, however, that
Lechner (2009) and Lechner and Miquel (2010) allow for different sets of covariates to control
for confounding of D and M (where the covariates of M may be affected by D/, whereas we
(similarly to Petersen et al. (2006)) assume the same X for D and M. Further below we argue
that this appears reasonable in our application (where D and M represent voucher award and
redemption respectively). The main reasons are
(a) the informative set of observed characteristics that are available (see the discussion in
Section 5.1),
(b) the small time lag between D and M and
(c) the randomly assigned pseudostart dates for D and M among those with D = 0 and M = 0
or D = 1 and M = 0.
The aim of this procedure is to control for any differences in elapsed unemployment durations
(that are likely to affect Y/ across redeemers, non-redeemers and non-awardees respectively. See
Section 4.2 for further details.
Assumption 3. Pr.D = 1|X = x/ < 1 and 0 < Pr.M = 1|D = 1, X = x/ < 1 for all x in the support
of X.
The ﬁrst part of assumption 3 requires that no combination of covariates perfectly predicts
a voucher award; otherwise no comparable observations (in terms of conditioning variables
X/ without an award (and, thus, without redemption) exist, implying that Δ, θ and γ (which
involve Y 0,0 / cannot be identiﬁed. The second part requires that, conditional on a voucher
award, no combination of X perfectly predicts redemption or non-redemption; otherwise, θ
(which involves Y 1,1 /, γ (which involves Y 1,0 / and δ (which involves both) are not identiﬁed.
Assumptions 1 and 2 together imply the following conditional independence restriction:
{Y 1,1 , Y 1,0 , Y 0,0 } ⊥
⊥ {D, M}|X = x for all x in the support of X. Technically, the various combinations of D and M (despite their sequentiality) may be treated as distinct treatments when
identifying θ, γ and δ by conditioning on X. Therefore, we can analyse the effects of the
various treatment–mediator combinations in a standard multiple-treatment-effect framework,
as outlined in Imbens (2000) and Lechner (2001). It follows that
1

E.Y 1,M |D = 1/ = E.Y 1 |D = 1/ = E.Y |D = 1/,
0

E.Y 0,M |D = 1/ = E.Y 0,0 |D = 1/ = E.Y 0 |D = 1/ = E {E.Y |D = 0, X = x/},
X|D=1

E.Y d,m |D = 1/ = E {E.Y |D = d, M = m, X = x/},
X|D=1

with EA|B=b .C/ denoting the expectation of C taken over the distribution of A conditional on
B = b. The second and third lines ares implied by assumption 1, and assumptions 1 and 2

448

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

respectively. The derivation of these results is standard (e.g. Heckman et al. (1998), section 3)
and has been omitted.)
However, directly controlling for a possibly high dimensional vector X when estimating
EX|D=1 {E.Y |D = 0, X = x/} and EX|D=1 {E.Y |D = d, M = m, X = x/} may lead to the curse
of dimensionality. Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) showed that we may instead condition on
the treatment propensity scores, in our case p.x/ = Pr.D = 1|X = x/ and pdm .x/ = Pr.D = d,
M = m|X = x/, which balance the distributions of X. Therefore, it holds that
0

E.Y 0,M |D = 1/ =
E.Y d,m |D = 1/ =

E

E

p.X/|D=1

pdm .X/|D=1

[E{Y |D = 0, p.X/ = p.x/}],

[E{Y |D = d, M = m, pdm .X/ = pdm .x/}]:

This has the practical advantage that the vector of covariates consists of a single variable.
This circumvents the curse of dimensionality if the propensity scores are well approximated by
parametric probability models. The effects of interest are obtained by matching on estimates of
p.X/ and pdm .X/. Speciﬁcally, Δ is estimated by
(a) matching to all voucher awardees comparison observations without voucher award that
are similar in terms of estimates of p.X/ and
(b) taking the mean difference in outcomes between the two groups.
The estimation of θ is based on two matching steps: ﬁrst, to all awardees, one matches redeemers
that are comparable in terms of estimates of p11 .X/. Second, to all awardees, one matches nonredeemers that are comparable in terms of estimates of p00 .X/. Taking the mean difference in
outcomes between matched redeemers and non-redeemers yields the effect of interest. Analogous approaches are used for the estimation of γ and δ.
3.3. Estimation
Estimation of the various effects of interest (see Section 3.1) is based on radius matching on the
propensity score with bias adjustment by using the estimator of Lechner et al. (2011). Whereas
the propensity scores px .X/ and pdm .X/ are parametrically speciﬁed by probit models, the conditional expectations of the outcomes are unrestricted and thus non-parametric. The algorithm
is more precise than nearest-neighbour matching because of the idea of radius matching (e.g.
Dehejia and Wahba (2002)). Furthermore, the procedure uses the initial matching weights for
a (weighted) regression adjustment for bias reduction in a second step (see Abadie and Imbens
(2011)). Therefore, the estimator satisﬁes a so-called double-robustness property, implying that
it is consistent if either the propensity score or the regression model is correctly speciﬁed (e.g.
Rubin (1979) and Joffe et al. (2004)). Moreover, the regression adjustment should reduce small
sample and asymptotic biases of matching. Huber et al. (2013) investigated the ﬁnite sample
properties of this algorithm along with other matching-type estimators and found it to be very
competitive.
We match on the linear index of the probit speciﬁcation of the propensity score and use a datadriven approach to the choice of the radius size, i.e. we set the latter to 90% of the 0.9th quantile
of the distance between matched treated and control observations occurring in standard nearestneighbour matching. (If there is no comparison observation within the radius, then the nearest
neighbour is matched.) Alternative radius sizes do not affect the results importantly (see Table
D.1 of the on-line appendix D). Inference is based on bootstrapping the respective effect 999
times and using the standard deviation of the bootstrapped effects as an estimate of the standard
error of the t-statistic. Abadie and Imbens (2008) showed that bootstrap-based standard errors

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

449

may be invalid for matching based on a ﬁxed number of comparison observations. However,
our matching algorithm is smoother than the latter approach because it (by the nature of radius
matching) uses a variable number of comparisons that are distance weighted within the radius
and, moreover, applies the regression adjustment. Therefore, the bootstrap is likely to be a
valid inference procedure for the radius matching estimator that is used. It performs well in a
large-scale (empirically based) simulation study by Bodory et al. (2016), who investigated the
performance of several variance estimators in the context of propensity-score-based matching
estimation.
4.

Empirical implementation

This section describes the data and the selection of our estimation sample.
4.1. Data
Our analysis is based on administrative data provided by the Federal Employment Agency of
Germany, namely the ‘Integrated employment biographies’ (IEB) database. (The IEB database
is a rich administrative database and has been used in virtually all recent studies on German ALMPs (e.g. Biewen et al. (2014), Lechner et al. (2011), Lechner and Wunsch (2013)
and Rinne et al. (2013)). The IEB is a merged data ﬁle containing individual records collected by four different administrative processes: the Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB) employment history (Beschäftigten-Historik), the IAB beneﬁt recipient history (Leistungsempfänger-Historik), the data on job search originating from the applicants pool
database (Bewerberangebot) and the participants-in-measures data (Massnahme-TeilnehmerGesamtdatenbank). The IAB is the research department of the Federal Employment Agency.)
The IEBs contain information on all individuals in Germany who received a voucher between
2003 and 2004, along with subsequent participation in vocational training programmes, i.e.
the precise award and redemption dates for each voucher as well as the start and end dates
of vocational trainings are observed. Furthermore, the data include detailed daily information
on employment subject to social security contributions, receipt of transfer payments during
unemployment, job search, and participation in various ALMPs (type and duration), as well
as rich individual information (e.g. education, age, gender, marital status, profession and nationality) and regional (labour market) characteristics. Thus, we can control for a wealth of
personal characteristics and detailed labour market histories (e.g. type of employment, industry, occupational status and earnings) for all individuals receiving a voucher and thus capture
the key confounders in such settings, as identiﬁed by Lechner and Wunsch (2013). Furthermore, we make use of a control sample of unemployed individuals without voucher awards
during the years 2003 and 2004. The sample also originates from the IEB database and is a
3% random sample of individuals who experienced at least one transition from employment
to non-employment (lasting at least 1 month) in 2003. (We account for the different sampling
probabilities whenever necessary by using sampling weights. These probabilities differ only for
unemployed people obtaining a voucher versus not obtaining a voucher. They are identical
within the two groups.)
4.2. Sample definition
The evaluation sample is an inﬂow sample into unemployment. It consists of individuals who
became unemployed in 2003 after having been continuously employed for at least 3 months.
Entering unemployment is deﬁned as transitioning from (non-subsidized, non-marginal, nonseasonal) employment to registered non-employment for at least 1 month. We focus on individuals who are eligible for unemployment beneﬁts at the time of inﬂow into unemployment. Thus,

450

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

this sample focuses on the main target groups of these programmes. To exclude speciﬁc ALMPs
targeting youths and individuals who are eligible for early retirement schemes, we consider only
people aged between 25 and 54 years at the beginning of the unemployment spell.
One concern regarding the award and redemption deﬁnition is the timing with respect to the
elapsed unemployment duration before award and redemption of the voucher. The award and redemption decisions are dynamic processes. Caseworkers can award a voucher to an unemployed
individual on any day after the start of the unemployment spell, as long as the caseworkers’ client
has not found employment. Awardees can redeem vouchers on any day of their validity, unless
the awardee started a new job. Therefore, several issues must be taken into account.
If the sample had been sufﬁciently large, an attractive approach would have been to use the
dynamic evaluation framework (as suggested by Robins (1986), Lechner (2009) and Miquel and
Lechner (2010)), which would allow us to account both for the timing of the voucher award and
the subsequent redemption. Alternatively, Abbring and van den Berg (2003, 2004) and Heckman
and Navarro (2007) took the timing of programme starts explicitly into account. However, given
our small sample size (we observe 8061 awardees with unredeemed vouchers), neither approach is
feasible with our data at the desired level of ﬂexibility. Furthermore, the sample sizes are too small
to follow the approach that was suggested by Fredriksson and Johansson (2008) and applied
by Sianesi (2004) to estimate differential effects by the elapsed duration of unemployment. It is
difﬁcult to interpret these effects because, at any given duration, a substantial fraction of nonawardees or non-redeemers change their status shortly thereafter. Hence the estimated effects
are mixtures of the true programme effects and differences due to shifted timings of voucher
award and redemption.
As a compromise that trades off the issues that were just raised and is feasible for our data,
we consider a classical static evaluation model and use the following deﬁnitions. Awardees are
those unemployed who receive their ﬁrst voucher in the ﬁrst 12 months of unemployment.
Control group members are not awarded with a voucher during this time period. Redeemers
are those awardees who redeem their voucher within the maximum validity of 3 months. Nonredeemers do not start vocational training during the ﬁrst 3 months after the voucher award.
Using these deﬁnitions within a static evaluation approach provides a more obvious—though
not necessarily cleaner—deﬁnition of awardees and redeemers than the approaches that were
advocated by Fredriksson and Johansson (2008) and Sianesi (2004).
Potentially this approach could lead to a higher share of individuals with better labour market characteristics among control group and non-redeemers than among the awardees and
redeemers, because individuals in the control group and non-redeemers had possibly already
found a job before their potential award or redemption times (e.g. Fredriksson and Johansson
(2008)). This would bias the results negatively. To check the sensitivity of our results, we randomly assign pseudoaward dates to each individual in the control group. Thereby, we recover
the distribution of the elapsed duration of unemployment at the time of voucher award from the
treatment group (similarly to, for example, Lechner (1999) and Lechner and Smith (2007)). To
ensure comparability of the treatment deﬁnitions of the awardees and non-awardees, we consider only individuals who are unemployed at their (pseudo)voucher award. Following similar
arguments, the same approach is applied with respect to the mediator to create (pseudo)voucher
redemption dates among those who did not redeem a voucher. (592 individuals with expired
vouchers were dropped because of the deﬁnition of the pseudovoucher redemption dates.) This
makes the groups of individuals with redeemed and expired vouchers comparable with respect
to the duration of unemployment.
In Fig. 2 in Section 6 as well as Figs C.1–C.5 in the Web appendix C, we show the results
controlling for the elapsed duration of unemployment until (pseudo)voucher award and

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers
Table 1.

451

Means and standardized biases of selected variables†
Subsample means
Voucher
awarded

Individual characteristics
Age
Children under 3 years
Health problems
Incapacities
No German citizenship
No schooling degree
University entry degree (Abitur)
Elementary occupation
Craft, machine operators and related
Clerks

Standardized differences: comparisons
of groups

Voucher
redeemed

(1)–(2) (1)–(3) (1)–(4) (3)–(4)

Yes,
(1)

No,
(2)

Yes,
(3)

No,
(4)

39.03
0.43
0.02
0.12
0.07
0.04
0.23
0.07
0.29
0.25

41.75
0.35
0.06
0.19
0.10
0.07
0.17
0.10
0.35
0.16

39.01
0.43
0.02
0.11
0.07
0.04
0.24
0.07
0.29
0.25

39.11
0.41
0.03
0.17
0.08
0.04
0.23
0.07
0.28
0.25

31.44
15.06
20.08
19.53
10.35
13.74
17.21
11.15
13.60
23.08

0.27
0.58
2.08
3.70
0.60
0.33
0.40
0.21
0.37
0.02

1.10
2.39
7.35
13.75
2.40
1.34
1.66
0.87
1.52
0.10

1.38
2.97
9.38
17.43
3.00
1.67
2.06
1.09
1.89
0.12

44.30
2.19

45.19
1.59

45.12
1.63

12.33
11.74

0.21
0.17

0.83
0.67

1.04
0.84

84199
10.95

91126 91799
9.14 7.92

14.71
31.44

0.27
4.09

1.10
16.42

1.37
20.54

Individual labour market history
Half-months employed in last 2 years 45.17
Half-months out of labour force in
1.59
last 2 years
Cumulative earnings in last 4 years
91258
Months of remaining unemployment
8.90
beneﬁts
Elapsed unemployment duration
4.46

3.76

4.19

5.56

21.04

8.08

30.56

38.81

0.06
0.78
868
12.53

7.17
3.94
5.72
3.69

2.64
2.84
2.69
0.13

11.20
10.63
10.02
0.52

13.84
13.46
12.69
0.65

Regional characteristics
Share of employment in construction
Share of vacant full-time jobs
Population per km2
Unemployment rate (%)

0.06
0.78
965
12.33

0.06
0.78
919
12.33

0.06
0.77
1156
12.36

Observations
Sum of weighted observations

41138 51878 33077
41138 559704 33077

8061
8061

†See Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985) for a deﬁnition of the standardized difference. They considered an absolute
standardized difference of more than 20 as being ‘large’. The full set of results is contained in Table A.1 in the
Web appendix A. The dummy variable ‘health problems’ indicates disabilities and health problems which do not
fully prevent the unemployed from working but may reduce the number of possible working hours or the number
of possible jobs. The dummy variable ‘incapacities’ indicates pregnancies, necessarily of medical rehabilitation, or
incapability to work because of other reasons.

(pseudo)redemption. In Figs E.1–E.7 in the Web appendix E, we show the results without
controlling for the elapsed duration of unemployment. The results are not strongly affected by
the omission of this variable. Most ﬁndings are qualitatively similar. Nevertheless, the results
without controlling for the elapsed duration of unemployment suggest overall lower returns to
training. These ﬁndings are in line with the presumption that not accounting for the elapsed
duration of unemployment biases the results negatively (or positively for unemployment).
4.3. Descriptive statistics
The baseline sample includes 93 016 (or 600 842 weighted) observations (The IAB provided a
data set that contains 230 842 (or 3 638 851 weighted) observations. This sample is representative

452

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a) Mean employment and (b) mean unemployment (group means after using radius matching to
adjust the covariate distributions of all groups to that in ‘voucher award’):
, voucher award;
,
voucher redemption;
, expired voucher; –  – , control group

of the inﬂow into unemployed in 2003 and 2004 subject to the following sample restrictions:
previous employment of at least 3 months, some contact with the employment agency within
the ﬁrst 3 months of unemployment, unemployment durations of at least 1 month, eligible for
unemployment beneﬁts and aged between 25 and 54 years. We do not consider treatments after
2004 because, in January 2005, a substantial labour market reform took place in Germany (the

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

453

so-called Hartz IV reform). Thus, we restrict our sample to individuals who became unemployed
in 2003. This enables us to consider for all unemployed individuals a potential treatment within
the ﬁrst 12 months of their unemployment spell. Further, we drop individuals with marginal,
seasonal or subsidized employment before their last unemployment spell. This leaves 124 696
observations. Another 31 680 observations were dropped because of the deﬁnition of the pseudovoucher award and redemption times. See the descriptive statistics of the initial and ﬁnal
sample in Table A.2 in the Web appendix A.) 41 138 observations include an awarded voucher
in 2003 or 2004, whereas 51 878 do not. Of the former group, 33 077 individuals redeemed their
voucher, whereas 8 061 did not. Table 1 reports the means of selected observed characteristics
across groups deﬁned in terms of treatment and mediator states (see the on-line Table A.1 for a
more extensive set of variables): voucher awarded, no voucher awarded, voucher redeemed and
voucher expired (note that the last two groups are subsamples of the ﬁrst). Pairwise standardized
mean differences (see Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985)) are also shown as measures of covariate
balance. Information on individual characteristics refers to the time of inﬂow into unemployment. Only for elapsed duration of unemployment and remaining eligibility for unemployment
beneﬁts do we consider the measurements at the time of the (pseudo)voucher award.
The descriptive statistics in Table 1 reveal that voucher recipients (column (1)) and nonrecipients (column (2)) differ importantly in several socio-economic characteristics, such as age,
health, education and profession. In particular, those awarded vouchers are younger, healthier
and better educated, and have higher paying jobs. However, elapsed time in duration of unemployment is higher for recipients and, accordingly, the remaining eligibility for unemployment
beneﬁts is lower. Regional differences are generally less pronounced.
When comparing samples of unemployed individuals who redeem vouchers (column (3)) with
those whose voucher expires (column (4)), differences in socio-economic variables are small,
with the important exception that the latter group is likely to be suffering from incapacities
(and health problems in general), which may importantly drive non-redemption. Furthermore,
although the employment histories are quite comparable, non-redeemers have higher elapsed
unemployment durations and thus lower eligibility for unemployment beneﬁts at the time of the
voucher award than redeemers.
Figs 1(a) and 1(b) show the evolution of employment and registered unemployment over
time after using radius matching (as outlined above) to adjust the covariate distributions of
all groups to the respective distributions of voucher recipients. (Further outcome variables are
presented in the Web appendix A.) Over a horizon of 4 years (48 months) after voucher award,
employment rates reach approximately 60% and registered unemployment falls below 20% for
all groups. When comparing development across different groups, differences arise as a function
of time. Over the short run, the groups that partly or fully redeem vouchers appear to experience
so-called lock-in effects, i.e. they take up fewer jobs than non-recipients or non-redeemers. Over
the longer run, this effect disappears, and the former group experiences higher employment
than the group not participating in vocational training. The econometric analysis below will
reveal how much of these differences is driven by merely obtaining a voucher and by actually
redeeming it.
5.

Selection processes

5.1. Variables
Our identiﬁcation strategy requires observing all variables that jointly affect the voucher award
and the outcome and/or voucher redemption and the outcome in a relevant way. It is therefore
essential to understand which factors affect both voucher award and redemption.

454

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

Concerning voucher awards, the analyses of Biewen et al. (2014) and Lechner and Wunsch
(2013), both based on German labour market data, suggest that so-called pretreatment outcomes
(e.g. lagged employment and wages measured before the intervention or treatment of interest),
beneﬁt receipt histories, socio-economic factors and local labour market characteristics are
important confounders. This information is available in our data. In particular, the individuals’
labour market histories are observed up to 4 years before unemployment and regional factors
can be controlled for at the level of the local employment agency district. Furthermore, we
observe a range of socio-economic characteristics such as gender, age, education, profession,
marital status and having children. Although Doerr et al. (2016) argued that a voucher award
involves a similar selection process to that of assignment to ALMPs in general, they also noted
that the decision is left to the discretion of the caseworker. Our data also contain information
that was collected by the caseworker for use in counselling and assignment decisions, namely
information on the jobseeker’s current and previous health status, proxy variables indicating
whether an unemployed person lacks motivation (e.g. whether she or he dropped out of a past
programme or beneﬁts were withdrawn), and former sanctions.
Concerning actual redemption, Kruppe’s (2009) analysis of redemption behaviour suggests
that individuals with poor labour market prospects are less likely to redeem their vouchers. We
therefore suspect that previous labour market history, socio-economic characteristics such as
education and age, and local labour market conditions importantly inﬂuence an unemployed
individual’s decision to participate in vocational training, as they also inﬂuence the (personal
assessment of the) expected beneﬁts. Furthermore, physical and mental health and personality
traits that are associated with motivation and compliance in the counselling process (approximated by beneﬁt withdrawal and programme dropout) should affect participation. Conditionally on the available covariates, exogenous variation is likely to come from the temporal
and regional availability of particular courses (see, also, Section 5.3). One factor creating this
variation is that the Federal Employment Agency must certify the courses (for details, see the
discussion in Doerr et al. (2016)). This is a lengthy and inﬂexible administrative process which
is unlikely to be correlated with the individual redemption decision or with the employment
outcomes of voucher recipients.
Given that vouchers must be redeemed within 1 week–3 months, time varying (or dynamic)
confounders of redemption due to important changes in control variables after voucher award
but before redemption should not be an issue. To verify this argument, we use radius matching
to estimate the effects of voucher assignment on a range of covariates measured on the redemption date, which were all close to and not statistically different from 0. (One might nevertheless
be worried about changes in unobserved characteristics. One particular concern is that unemployed individuals receive or anticipate a job offer which we do not observe in our data and that
inﬂuences the decision not to participate in a programme. This would entail positive bias in the
direct effect of voucher award, particularly over the short run. Note, however, that we ﬁnd a
statistically signiﬁcant negative direct effect in the ﬁrst 3 years; see Section 6.) Further, we report
the means of the time varying covariates in Table A.3 of the Web appendix A. We ﬁnd strong
differences in the remaining eligibility for unemployment beneﬁts and in the elapsed duration
of unemployment. All other time varying variables show only small differences between the two
reference times. We therefore control for the same set of covariates at the same point in time
to tackle selection into both voucher award and redemption: gender, age, family background,
health and incapacities, nationality, school and vocational education, occupation, complete
employment and welfare history over the previous 4 years, past programme and sanction experience, timing and region of unemployment, and economic indicators at the level of the local
employment agency (see Table B.1 in the Web appendix B for the full set of control variables).

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers
Table 2.

455

Selected average marginal effects from propensity score estimation†
Award probability

Individual characteristics
Age
Older than 50 years
Children under 3 years
Health problems
Incapacities
No German citizenship
No schooling degree
University entry degree (Abitur)
Elementary occupation
Craft, machine operators and related
Clerks
Individual labour market history
Half-months employed in last 2 years
Half-months out of labour force in
last 2 years
Remaining unemployment insurance claim
Cumulative half-months employment
in last 4 years
Cumulative earnings in last 4 years
Regional characteristics
Share of employment in construction
Share of vacant full-time jobs
Population per km2
Unemployment rate (%)
Unconditional probability (%)
Sample size (weighted)

Redemption probability

Marginal
effect (%),
(1)

Standard
error,
(2)

−0:034‡
−9:86‡
1.14‡
−3:78‡
−2:95‡
−1:65‡
−2:80‡
0.743‡
0.299
0.743‡
3.98‡

0.0001
0.0031
0.0014
0.0028
0.0016
0.0022
0.0027
0.0021
0.0026
0.0022
0.0022

0.068§§
−4.90‡
0.187
−4.48‡
−6.27‡
−0.274
−0.406
0.812
0.385
0.768
1.173§§

0.0004
0.0163
0.0048
0.0122
0.0057
0.0078
0.0106
0.0059
0.0100
0.0080
0.0072

−0:037
−0:071§

0.0003
0.0004

0.179
−0:033

0.0012
0.0013

0.150‡
0.034‡
0.00001‡
5.17
0.512
0.0004‡
−0.037

Marginal
effect (%),
(3)

Standard
error,
(4)

0.00005
0.0001

0.131‡
0.074‡

0.0002
0.0002

2.1 × 10−8

−0.00003‡

6.9 × 10−8

0.0606
0.0074
6.3 × 10−7
0.0003

−4.89
13.2‡
−0.001‡
0.131

0.1987
0.0218
1.9 × 10−6
0.0009

6.85
93016 (600842)

80.4
41138 (41138)

†Probit model used. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. The complete set of variables
is contained in Table B.1 in the Web appendix B. The dummy variable ‘health problems’ indicates disabilities
and health problems which do not fully prevent the unemployed from working, but may reduce the number of
possible working hours or the number of possible jobs. The dummy variable ‘incapacities’ indicates pregnancies,
necessarily of medical rehabilitation, or incapability to work because of other reasons.
‡Signiﬁcant marginal effects at the 1% level.
§Signiﬁcant marginal effects at the 5% level.
§§Signiﬁcant marginal effect at the 10% level.

5.2. Empirical selection into award and redemption
Table 2 provides the probit estimates of two propensity score models for selection into treatment
and mediator states for a subset of variables (see Table B.1 in the Web appendix B for a full
set of results). Largely these results conﬁrm the pattern of univariate comparisons in Table 1.
Again, it appears that the group receiving vouchers has better overall labour market prospects
than the control group, with regional characteristics playing only a limited role.
Individual characteristics have a smaller inﬂuence on the redemption decision than on the
award decision (Table B.1 in the Web appendix B). Individuals with small children, incapacities,
health problems or lower motivation redeem their vouchers less frequently. However, the timing

456

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

of unemployment and regional characteristics seem to play important roles in the redemption
decision. Vouchers are redeemed less often in regions with a larger share of non-German unemployed workers and higher population densities. The redemption probability is higher in
regions with high employment shares in the production sector, many male unemployed workers
and many vacant full-time jobs.
5.3. Regional and temporal availability of vocational training courses
To gain some idea of regional differences in the provision of training courses, we calculate the
number of different courses per region (which we observe in the population of training participants). A course is assigned to a speciﬁc region if at least one participant from that region joins
in a speciﬁc month. Other courses may be open to voucher recipients but not observed in our
data. Subsequently, we calculate the maximum number of course choices for each awardee as
the sum of the number of course choices per region in the 3-month period following the award.
Although vouchers are valid for a period ranging from 1 week to 3 months, 89% of all vouchers
are valid for 3 months, with an average validity of 2.8 months. However, the individual voucher
certiﬁes eligibility for courses with only a certain objective, content and maximum duration.
Unfortunately, we cannot match vouchers to speciﬁc courses because we have only crude course
information. Therefore, this measure approximates an upper limit on the real number of choices.
On average, each awardee has a maximum choice set of 112 different courses. Only for 51 of
41 138 vouchers awarded do we observe zero possible choices of course. The maximum number of possible choices of course is 712. Fig. F.1 of the Web appendix F provides a histogram
of the observed choices of course. This ﬁgure documents a large variation in the maximum
number of possible choices of course per awardee. In Fig. F.2 of the Web appendix F, we report the time variation in the average number of maximum choices of course. We ﬁnd strong
seasonal effects. Most courses take place either in August–September or in February–March.
These dates are related to the typical school cycle in Germany. The school year begins in August or September (depending on the state). Fewer courses start before Christmas or summer
holidays.
In Table F.1 of the Web appendix F, we regress the maximum number of choices of course
on different regional characteristics and dummies for the month of the voucher award. We ﬁnd
strong variation in the maximum number of choices of course across states. We ﬁnd that the
maximum number of choices of course is larger in regions with higher population densities,
higher regional unemployment rates, many vacant full-time jobs and relatively large shares
of female and non-German unemployed workers. These ﬁndings are robust to controlling for
the month that the voucher is awarded. In Table F.2 of the Web appendix F, we estimate the
redemption probability with respect to the maximum number of choices of course. We ﬁnd
that this maximum number has a positive association with the redemption decision. Vouchers
are redeemed less often in regions with high population densities, but more often in regions
with high rates of unemployment. This supports our hypothesis that the regional and temporal
availability of training courses is correlated with the redemption decision.
5.4. Alternative treatments
In Table A.4 of the Web appendix A, we provide additional descriptive evidence of the amount
of other training obtained by the control group, the awardees, the redeemers and the nonredeemers. Second vouchers may be provided for consecutive vocational training programmes
or because the ﬁrst voucher expired (e.g. because no appropriate course was found). Individuals
are not entitled to a second voucher. The award of a second voucher is entirely up to the
discretion of the caseworker. Our data show that redeemers have an 11% probability and non-

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

457

redeemers a 22% probability of receiving a second voucher within 1 year. The control group
includes individuals not receiving a voucher during the ﬁrst 12 months of unemployment. Only
0.6% of individuals receive a voucher later. Individuals in the control group and non-redeemers
have an approximately 1-percentage-point higher probability of participating in an alternative
training programme (other than vocational training) than individuals who redeem their ﬁrst
voucher. Usually, these training programmes provide direction for the period of unemployment,
information about future employment possibilities or application training. Individuals in the
control group have a higher probability of participating in job creation schemes than do training
participants and non-redeemers. These programmes are designed for unemployed workers with
problems reintegrating into the labour market. They are a different target group from that for
vocational training, which is supposed to have high chances of re-employment. Individuals in
the control group and non-redeemers have a higher probability of receiving government grants
than do training participants. Government grants are work subsidies. Typically these are startup grants to become self-employed or subsidies paid to the employer for hiring unemployed
workers.
6.

Results

6.1. Main findings
The propensity score estimates that were presented in Table 2 serve as inputs into the matching
algorithm. When performing matching, one should check for potential issues of
(a) insufﬁcient support in the propensity scores across treatment states that may result in
incomparable matches as well as large matching weights of some non-treated observations
with speciﬁc propensity scores and
(b) imbalances in covariates after matching (due to inappropriate propensity score speciﬁcations).
In our application, insufﬁcient support is not a problem, as seen from the distributions of the
propensity scores of the different groups (details are shown in Figs B.1 and B.2 in the Web
appendix B). Furthermore, the important covariates are well balanced (for details see Table B2
in the Web Appendix B).
Fig. 2 provides the estimates of the average employment and unemployment effects on voucher
recipients, namely the (total) effects of voucher award versus non-award, Δ, and the effects of
voucher award and redemption versus non-award, θ, voucher award without redemption versus
non-award, γ, and voucher award with redemption versus voucher award without redemption, δ.
Concerning employment, we consider only (non-marginal, non-subsidized) employment lasting
at least 1 month. The curves reﬂect the effect magnitudes on the probability of being employed
or unemployed in a particular month after receiving a voucher over 4 years (48 months). The
symbols superimposed on the curves (diamonds) indicate effects that are (pointwise) statistically
signiﬁcantly different from 0 at the 5% level.
The results in Fig. 2(a) suggest that awarding a voucher has a negative (total) employment
effect among voucher recipients in the ﬁrst 3 years, particularly in the initial months where the
probability of employment decreases by as much as 10 percentage points. This dip suggests a
lock-in effect that is likely to be due to reduced job search intensity in response to (anticipated)
participation in vocational training. However, the negative effect fades over roughly 3 years,
and the probability of employment increases by approximately 2–3 percentage points in the
fourth year. The positive employment effect appears quite stable suggesting that the voucher
award system successfully offsets the initial lock-in effect with higher placement success in later

458

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) Employment and (b) registered unemployment (separate effects for the first 48 months following
the voucher award are estimated): ˘, significant effects at the 5% level;
, voucher award versus control
group;
, voucher redemption versus control group;
, voucher redemption versus expired voucher;
 –  –, expired voucher versus control group

periods. These results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the ﬁndings of Doerr et al.
(2016), even though they rely on a different empirical approach.
Fig. 2(b) shows that the time patterns in unemployment are reversed (as expected), but
the effects are initially larger. This is because over the short run the award of a voucher reduces dropout from the labour market as shown by the effect on the ‘out of labour force’ labour

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

459

market state (see Fig. C.2 in the Web appendix C for details). Similar in magnitude (but with the
opposite sign) to the employment effect, registered unemployment is somewhat reduced over
the long run.
When investigating the causal mechanisms underlying the total employment effect (with essentially symmetric results for registered unemployment), it becomes apparent that it is predominantly redemption (e.g. participation in or starting vocational training) driving the results. In
fact, the estimated effect of voucher award and redemption versus no award, θ, closely follows
the overall effect of voucher award, albeit that it is somewhat more negative in earlier periods
and more positive in later periods. In contrast, the direct effect of a voucher award without
redemption, γ, is insigniﬁcant and close to 0 over most of the fourth year. This suggests that,
over the long run, voucher assignment alone does not affect, for instance, preferences for human
capital investments in a way that inﬂuences employment success.
We ﬁnd a negative direct effect over the short run: even without redemption, a voucher
award decreases the probability of employment in the ﬁrst 3–3.5 years. Therefore, it appears
that non-redeemers reduce job search activities. This may be rooted in the learning and decision
process about the supply of vocational training. The possibility of awareness effects with respect
to inconspicuous survey questions has been documented in Crossley et al. (2014). Comparable
effects may occur in the labour market. Individuals may initially reduce their job search intensity
in response to a voucher award and consider the programmes that are available instead. Some
of them may not be satisﬁed with the available options and decide not to redeem the voucher.
Instead, they try to ﬁnd employment again. This possible channel would be in line with the results
of Crépon et al. (2014), who reported negative effects of notiﬁcations of planned training on
exits from employment. They argued that notiﬁcation of planned training causes an ‘attraction
effect’ that reduces search efforts, rather than a ‘threat effect’ that intensiﬁes job search (e.g. Van
den Berg et al. (2009)).
We would expect this initial direct lock-in effect to be less severe than for the total effect (which
includes the effect of actual redemption leading to training participation), as individuals should
be available for intensive job search sooner by foregoing redemption. Indeed, we ﬁnd that, in
the initial periods, the estimate of γ is considerably less negative than the estimates of Δ and
in particular of θ (redemption versus non-award). Accordingly, the estimate of δ (redemption
versus award without redemption) is initially negative (as δ = θ − γ) and signiﬁcantly so. In later
periods, however, redemption pays off for the group of voucher recipients: after roughly 2 years,
the estimates of Δ and θ dominate those of γ, and the estimates of δ are statistically signiﬁcant
and non-negligible (up to 5 percentage points) in later periods.
We considered several further outcome variables (detailed results are presented in the Web
appendix C). They contain a measure of employment stability, i.e. being employed for at least
6 months, for which the outcome evaluation window starts only in month 7 after the voucher
award. The estimates of the (total) effect of voucher award versus non-award, Δ, and voucher
award and redemption versus non-award, θ, on stable employment are qualitatively similar to
those on employment, albeit signiﬁcantly positive at a later point in time and of a somewhat
smaller magnitude. In contrast with Fig. 2(a) the estimate of the direct effect γ remains statistically signiﬁcantly negative until the end of the evaluation window (implying that the adverse
effect of not redeeming a voucher versus not receiving a voucher is more severe for stable employment), even though it shows an upward tendency.
Furthermore, we investigated the effects on full-time employment. Again, the results are qualitatively similar to the employment effects that are shown in Fig. 2(a), including an insigniﬁcant
direct effect in the fourth year after a voucher award. Similar conclusions are drawn concerning the effects on monthly earnings: after an initial lock-in phase, the estimates of Δ, θ and δ

460

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

are moderately positive (between C30 and C 70) and statistically signiﬁcantly in the fourth year,
whereas those of γ approach 0.
6.2. Cumulative effects
In Table C.1 of the Web appendix C, we report the cumulative effects of the different treatments
2 and 4 years after the award of a voucher. The cumulative employment and earnings effects
of awarding, redeeming and not redeeming a voucher never become positive compared with
the control group during our observation period. We do not observe signiﬁcant employment
and earnings effects of redeeming versus not redeeming a voucher after 4 years. Redeeming a
voucher increases or decreases the average probability over 4 years of being unemployed or out
of the labour force respectively.
After 2 years, we observe more negative indirect than direct voucher effects. Over the long
run, this relationship reverses but does not pay in terms of cumulated employment or earnings
during our observation period. This suggests that the beneﬁts of redeeming and not redeeming
a voucher are, on average, similar over the 4-year period. However, individuals proﬁt more from
not redeeming a voucher over the short run, whereas training is more beneﬁcial over the long
run. Suggestively, the beneﬁts of actual participation are greater than not redeeming a voucher
beyond the 4-year time horizon.
6.3. Effect heterogeneity
In this section, we investigate effect heterogeneity for redeemers and non-redeemers. In general, the results remain qualitatively similar across groups. However, the negative direct voucher
effects on employment are less severe for individuals who do not redeem the vouchers compared
with the group who redeemed them (see Figs C.6–C.12 in the Web appendix C). These differences in the direct voucher effects on employment are mainly driven by part-time and stable employment. The direct voucher effects on earnings are slightly more negative for non-redeemers
than for redeemers. The indirect voucher effects on employment and earnings are, over the
long run, more beneﬁcial to non-redeemers than to redeemers (see Figs C.13–C.19 in the Web
appendix C). These results are driven by full-time employment. This suggests that the selfselected redemption of vouchers reduces the long-term effectiveness of training participation.
However, the negative lock-in effect of training participation would be steeper for non-redeemers
than for redeemers.
If the long-run positive employment beneﬁts exceed the initial period of deterioration, these
results could point to a behavioural bias. Awardees who could ultimately beneﬁt most from
training participation let their voucher expire. They might have incorrect information or inaccurate expectations about the future returns to vocational training. Alternatively, they merely
have higher preferences for short-term employment and earnings opportunities. However, these
possibilities cannot be veriﬁed with our data.
7.

Conclusion

Using rich administrative labour market data from Germany, we evaluated the effectiveness of
awarding vouchers for vocational training programmes to unemployed individuals. We found
an overall negative short-run but a positive longer-run effect on the chances of employment of
voucher recipients. We also investigated the causal mechanism through which the overall effect
materializes by using sequential conditional independence assumptions for identiﬁcation. In
particular, we considered the direct employment effect of voucher assignment (net of actual

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

461

redemption), which may be driven, for instance by decreased job search intensity during the
assessment of training options or increased salience or awareness of (and changed preferences
for) human capital investments in general.
The direct effect was small and statistically insigniﬁcant over the longer run but negative over
the short run (albeit less so than the overall effect), pointing to decreased search intensity shortly
after voucher assignment (despite non-redemption). In contrast, the effect of actual voucher
redemption (versus non-award and non-redemption) closely follows the overall effect, although
it is somewhat more negative in earlier periods and more positive in later periods. Comparing the
latter with the direct effect suggests that, conditionally on voucher assignment, redemption (and,
thus, actual programme participation) entails a more severe negative (lock-in) effect on voucher
recipient than non-redemption, which is intuitive because individuals not redeeming vouchers
are available for the labour market sooner. Over the longer run, however, redemption pays off
by increasing the employment probability by approximately 2–3 percentage points compared
with non-award in the fourth (and last observed) year after voucher assignment.
From a policy perspective, these results suggest that the introduction of a voucher award
system, which was embraced to promote responsibility for training among participants and
competition between training providers, may lead to a loss of effectiveness if individuals do
not make use of the awards, because non-redemption entails lower chances of employment
than both redemption over the long run and non-assignment over the short run Therefore nonredemption appears to be the least attractive option. These ﬁndings are relevant to delivering
ALMPs by using a voucher system.
Acknowledgements
Michael Lechner is also afﬁliated with the Centre for Economic Policy Research London,
CESIfo, Munich, the IAB, Nuremberg, and the Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.
Anthony Strittmatter is also afﬁliated with the Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg. We beneﬁtted from comments by Annabelle Doerr, Bernd Fitzenberger, Thomas Kruppe and
Gesine Stephan. Financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation, grant SNF
100018 137769, for the project ‘Identifying causal mechanisms in empirical economics’ is gratefully acknowledged. This study is also part of the project ‘Regional allocation intensities,
effectiveness and reform effects of training vouchers in active labor market policies’, IAB project
1155. We gratefully acknowledge data support from the IAB. Anthony Strittmatter acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the IAB. The usual disclaimer applies.
References
Abadie, A. and Imbens, G. W. (2008) On the failure of the bootstrap for matching estimators. Econometrica, 76,
1537–1557.
Abadie, A. and Imbens, G. W. (2011) Bias-corrected matching estimators for average treatment effects. J. Bus.
Econ. Statist., 29, 1–11.
Abbring, J. H. and van den Berg, G. J. (2003) The non-parametric identiﬁcation of treatment effects in duration
models. Econometrica, 71, 1491–1517.
Abbring, J. H. and van den Berg, G. J. (2004) Analyzing the effect of dynamically assigned treatments using
duration models, binary treatment models, and panel data models. Empir. Econ., 29, 5–20.
Baron, R. M. and Kenny, D. A. (1986) The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological
research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. J. Personlty Socl Psychol., 51, 1173–1182.
Biewen, M., Fitzenberger, B., Osikominu, A. and Paul, M. (2014) The effectiveness of public sponsored training
revisited: the importance of data and methodological choices. J. Lab. Econ., 32, 837–897.
Bodory, H., Camponovo, L., Huber, M. and Lechner, M. (2016) The ﬁnite sample performance of inference
methods for propensity score matching and weighting estimators. Discussion Paper 2016-04. Department of
Economics, University of St Gallen, St Gallen.

462

M. Huber, M. Lechner and A. Strittmatter

Card, D., Kluve, J. and Weber, A. (2010) Active labour market policy evaluations: a meta-analysis. Econ. J., 120,
F452–F477.
Card, D., Kluve, J. and Weber, A. (2015) What works?: A meta analysis of recent active labor market program
evaluations. Discussion Paper 9236. Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.
Crépon, B., Ferraci, M., Jolivet, G. and van den Berg, G. J. (2014) Information shocks and the empirical evaluation
of training programs during unemployment spells. Working Paper. Centre de Recherche en Économie et
Statistique–Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques, Paris.
Crossley, T. F., de Bresser, J., Delaney, L. and Winter, J. (2014) Can survey participation alter household saving
behavior? Econ. J., to be published.
Dehejia, R. H. and Wahba, S. (2002) Propensity-score-matching methods for nonexperimental causal studies.
Rev. Econ. Statist., 84, 151–161.
Doerr, A., Fitzenberger, B., Kruppe, T., Paul, M. and Strittmatter, A. (2016) Employment and earnings effects
of awarding training vouchers in Germany. Industrl Lab. Relns Rev., to be published.
Doerr, A. and Kruppe, T. (2015) Training vouchers, local employment agencies, and policy styles. J. Lab. Markt
Res., 48, 41–56.
Doerr, A. and Strittmatter, A. (2014) Assignment mechanisms, selection criteria, and the effectiveness of training programmes. Discussion Paper 1421. School of Economics and Political Science, University of St Gallen,
St Gallen.
Flores, C. A. and Flores-Lagunes, A. (2009) Identiﬁcation and estimation of causal mechanisms and net effects
of a treatment under unconfoundedness. Discussion Paper 4237. Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.
Fredriksson, P. and Johannsen, P. (2008) Dynamic treatment assignment—the consequences for evaluations using
observational data. J. Bus. Econ. Statist., 26, 435–445.
Ham, J. C. and Lalonde, R. J. (1996) The effect of sample selection and initial conditions in duration models:
evidence from experimental data on training. Econometrica, 64, 175–205.
Heckman, J., Ichimura, H. and Todd, P. (1998) Matching as an econometric evaluation estimator. Rev. Econ.
Stud., 65, 261–294.
Heckman, J. and Navarro, S. (2007) Dynamic discrete choice and dynamic treatment effects. J. Econmetr., 136,
341–396.
Heckman, J., Pinto, R. and Savelyev, P. (2013) Understanding the mechanisms through which an inﬂuential early
childhood program boosted adult outcomes. Am. Econ. Rev., 103, 2052–2086.
Heinrich, C., Mueser, P., Troske, K., Jeon, K. and Kahvecioglu, D. (2010) New estimates of public employment
and training program net impacts: a nonexperimental evaluation of the Workforce Investment Act program.
Working Paper 1003. Department of Economics, University of Missouri, Columbia.
Huber, M. (2014) Identifying causal mechanisms (primarily) based on inverse probability weighting. J. Appl.
Econmetr., 29, 920–943.
Huber, M., Lechner, M. and Wunsch, C. (2013) The performance of estimators based on the propensity score. J.
Econmetr., 175, 1–21.
Imai, K., Keele, L. and Yamamoto, T. (2010) Identiﬁcation, inference and sensitivity analysis for causal mediation
effects. Statist. Sci., 25, 51–71.
Imbens, G. W. (2000) The role of the propensity score in estimating dose-response functions. Biometrika, 87,
706–710.
Joffe, M. M., Ten Have, T. R., Feldman, H. and Kimmel, S. E. (2004) Model selection, confounder control, and
marginal structural models: review and new applications. Am. Statistn, 58, 272–279.
Kruppe, T. (2009) Bildungsgutscheine in der aktiven Arbeitsmarktpolitik. Sozl. Fortschr., 58, 9–19.
Lechner, M. (1999) Earnings and employment effects of continuous off-the-job training in East Germany after
uniﬁcation. J. Bus. Econ. Statist., 17, 74–90.
Lechner, M. (2001) Identiﬁcation and estimation of causal effects of multiple treatments under the conditional independence assumption. In Econometric Evaluation of Labour Market Policies (eds M. Lechner and F. Pfeiffer),
pp. 43–58. Heidelberg: Physica.
Lechner, M. (2009) Sequential causal models for the evaluation of labor market program. J. Bus. Econ. Statist.,
27, 71–83.
Lechner, M. and Miquel, R. (2010) Identiﬁcation of the effects of dynamic treatments by sequential conditional
independence assumptions. Empir. Econ., 39, 111–137.
Lechner, M., Miquel, R. and Wunsch, C. (2011) Long-run effects of public sector sponsored training in West
Germany. J. Eur. Econ. Ass., 9, 742–784.
Lechner, M. and Smith, J. (2007) What is the value added by caseworkers? Lab. Econ., 14, 135–151.
Lechner, M. and Wunsch, C. (2013) Sensitivity of matching-based program evaluations to the availability of
control variables. Lab. Econ., 21, 111–121.
Miquel, R. and Lechner, M. (2009) Identiﬁcation of effects of dynamic treatments by sequential conditional
independence assumptions. Empir. Econ., 39, 111–137.
Pearl, J. (2001) Direct and indirect effects. In Proc. 17th Conf. Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 411–420.
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Petersen, M. L., Sinisi, S. E. and van der Laan, M. J. (2006) Estimation of direct causal effects. Epidemiology, 17,
276–284.

Direct and Indirect Effects of Training Vouchers

463

Rinne, U., Uhlendorff, A. and Zhao, Z. (2013) Vouchers and caseworkers in training programs for the unemployed.
Empir. Econ., 45, 1089–1127.
Robins, J. M. (1986) A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with sustained exposure periods—
application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Math. Modllng, 7, 1393–1512.
Robins, J. M. (1987a) Errata to “A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with sustained exposure
periods—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect”. Comput. Math. Appl., 14, 917–921.
Robins, J. M. (1987b) Addendum to “A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with sustained
exposure periods—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect”. Comput. Math. Appl., 14,
923–945.
Robins, J. M. (1987c) Errata to “Addendum to ‘A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with
sustained exposure periods—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect”’. Comput. Math.
Appl., 18, 477.
Robins, J. M. (1989) The analysis of randomized and nonrandomized AIDS treatment trials using a new approach
to causal inference in longitudinal studies. In Health Service Research Methodology: a Focus on AIDS (eds L.
Sechrest, H. Freeman and A. Mulley), pp. 113–159. Washington DC: National Center for Health Services
Research.
Robins, J. M. (2003) Semantics of causal DAG models and the identiﬁcation of direct and indirect effects. In
Highly Structured Stochastic Systems (eds P. J. Green, N. L. Hjort and S. Richardson), pp. 70–81. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Robins, J. M. and Greenland, S. (1992) Identiﬁability and exchangeability for direct and indirect effects. Epidemiology, 3, 143–155.
Robins, J. M., Hernan, M. A. and Brumback, B. (2000) Marginal structural models and causal inference in
epidemiology. Epidemiology, 11, 550–560.
Rosenbaum, P. and Rubin, D. B. (1983) The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal
effects. Biometrika, 70, 41–55.
Rosenbaum, P. and Rubin, D. B. (1985) Constructing a control group using multivariate matched sampling
methods that incorporate the propensity score. Am. Statistn, 39, 33–38.
Rubin, D. B. (1974) Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies. J. Educ.
Psychol., 66, 688–701.
Rubin, D. B. (1979) Using multivariate matched sampling and regression adjustment to control bias in observational studies. J. Am. Statist. Ass., 74, 318–328.
Rubin, D. B. (1980) Discussion of ‘Randomization analysis of experimental data in the Fisher randomization test’
by D. Basu. J. Am. Statist. Ass., 75, 591–593.
Sianesi, B. (2004) An evaluation of the Swedish system of active labour market programmes in the 1990s. Rev.
Econ. Statist., 86, 133–155.
Van den Berg, G. J., Bergemann, A. and Caliendo, M. (2009) The effect of active labor market programs on not-yet
treated unemployed individuals. J. Eur. Econ. Ass., 7, 696–616.
VanderWeele, T. J. (2009) Marginal structural models for the estimation of direct and indirect effects. Epidemiology,
20, 18–26.

Supporting information
Additional ‘supporting information’ may be found in the on-line version of this article:
‘Online appendix’.

