

Martin Huber
University of Fribourg, Switzerland

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels
Splitting a policy intervention’s effect into its causal channels can
improve the quality of policy analysis
Keywords: causal channels, causal mechanisms, mediation analysis, direct and indirect effects

di
re
($ ct c
13 au
pe sal
r w ch
ee ann
k) el

Policy evaluation aims at assessing the causal effect of
an intervention (for example job-seeker counseling) on a
specific outcome (for example employment). Frequently,
the causal channels through which an effect materializes
can be important when forming policy advice. For
instance, it is essential to know whether counseling affects
employment through training programs, sanctions, job
search assistance, or other dimensions, in order to design
an optimal counseling process. So-called “mediation
analysis” is concerned with disentangling causal effects
into various causal channels to assess their respective
importance.

Disentangling the effect of an intervention into direct and
indirect channels
Mediator (M)
Number of hours worked per week
in third year after program start

In

ELEVATOR PITCH

Intervention (D)
Participation in US Job
Corps program

Direct causal effect (not statistically
significantly different from zero)

Outcome (Y)
Weekly earnings in third
year after program start

Note: The US Job Corps program targets those aged 16–24 from
low-income households. The program’s earnings effect was driven by
increased labor market supply, while no significant effect was found on
the hourly wage.
Source: Author’s own illustration based on [1].

KEY FINDINGS
Pros
Mediation analysis of a particular policy effect
gives a better understanding of why specific policy
interventions are effective or ineffective.
Mediation analysis directed at a policy effect’s
causal channels is likely to result in better policy
advice, particularly with respect to the optimal
design of the various components of a policy
intervention.
Analyzing causal channels helps to understand
the aspects of an intervention whose effectiveness
appears particularly interesting (i.e. more relevant
than that of other aspects).

Cons
Analyzing causal channels requires stronger
behavioral (or identifying) assumptions than
evaluating the “conventional” (total) causal effect
of a policy intervention.
Sufficiently rich data, which plausibly justify key
behavioral assumptions, are needed to analyze
causal channels; panel data are typically required
in these cases, but are not always available.

AUTHOR’S MAIN MESSAGE
Policy evaluations have widely neglected the potential merits of analyzing causal channels to deliver more accurate policy
advice. Mediation analysis appears increasingly attractive in a world with growing availability of rich data, even though
it relies on non-trivial behavioral assumptions and comparably strong data requirements. The assessment of causal
channels by mediation analysis should thus be considered for future policy evaluations. For instance, when investigating
the extent to which a labor policy’s effect on earnings comes from increased search effort, increased human capital, or
other mediators that are themselves affected by the policy.
Disentangling policy effects into causal channels. IZA World of Labor 2016: 259
doi: 10.15185/izawol.259 | Martin Huber © | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

1

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

MOTIVATION
Policy evaluation typically aims at assessing the causal effect of a policy intervention,
often referred to as a “treatment” (e.g. an active labor market policy), on an economic
or social outcome of interest (e.g. employment or income). Most evaluations focus
on the “total” causal effect of the treatment, rather than the underlying causal
channels that drive this effect. That is, these evaluations do not typically investigate
the possibility that the total effect may be rooted in distinct causal channels related
to intermediate variables that affect the final outcome. These intermediate variables
are often referred to as “mediators,” and the investigation of their role is known as
“mediation analysis.” If such mediators exist, the total effect can, under particular
assumptions, be decomposed into several channels.
As the illustration on page 1 shows, the various channels are a direct effect of the
treatment on the outcome, and one (or multiple) indirect effect(s) which “run(s)”
through the mediator(s). Such decomposition frequently offers a more comprehensive
picture about social and economic implications than the total effect alone, and may
be important for deriving meaningful policy conclusions [2].

DISCUSSION OF PROS AND CONS
Illustrative examples
Three examples are used to emphasize the potential merits of mediation analysis.
First, consider the employment effect of job-seeker training followed by additional
(human capital increasing) programs that also affect employment. Disentangling the
direct and indirect effects (via the additional programs) shows whether the initial
training is effective per se, or only together with the later programs. This can be useful
for the optimal design of (sequences of) programs for job-seekers [2].
Second, consider disentangling the employment effect of the entire job counseling
process provided by employment offices. It is interesting to determine whether the
treatment “job counseling” affects employment through placement into training
programs, job search assistance, sanctioning (or threat of sanctioning) in the case
of noncompliance, personal communication or counseling style of the caseworker, or
other dimensions [3]. Knowledge about these channels may help develop guidelines
for a more efficient counseling process.
Early childhood interventions represent the third example. These may, for instance,
provide access to (high-quality) childcare or increase the teacher-to-children ratio
in kindergartens for children from families with a disadvantaged social background.
Here, an important issue is whether such interventions affect outcomes later in life
(e.g. income, health, and life satisfaction) exclusively through educational decisions
(e.g. graduating from high school or college), which are themselves affected by early
childhood conditions, or also through other channels, like personality traits. This may
provide insights as to whether interventions at a later point in life (e.g. waiving tuition
fees for college attendance) can be as effective as early childhood programs in terms
of producing socially desirable impacts.
The evaluation of direct and indirect effects is now widespread in social sciences
thanks to a key piece of seminal work [4]. However, a significant portion of the earlier

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

2

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

literature on causal channels relies on rather rigid behavioral models. One problematic
restriction is that the effects of (i) the treatment on the outcome; (ii) the treatment
on the mediator; and (iii) the mediator on the outcome are commonly characterized
by (linear) models which assume the respective effects to be the same for everyone
in the population of interest (irrespective of differences in individual characteristics).
Even though this makes mediation analysis very convenient, it imposes severe rigidities
on the nature of human behavior. A second unrealistic restriction, which is often
imposed implicitly, is the quasi-randomness of the mediator with respect to the
outcome. In other words, it is assumed that, apart from the treatment itself, there
are no further characteristics that jointly influence the mediator and the outcome.
Mediation analysis is not straightforward, even when the treatment is randomized,
for instance in an experiment. The randomness of the treatment does not imply
randomness of the mediator, because the mediator is itself a post-treatment variable
(and can, thus, be interpreted as an intermediate outcome) [5].
An intuitive example that demonstrates how the careless handling of a mediator likely
leads to flawed results can be found when assessing the effect of a mother’s smoking
during pregnancy on post-natal infant mortality. In general, the empirical literature finds
a positive relationship between smoking and infant mortality. However, several studies
point out that, among those children with the lowest birth weight (i.e. conditional
on the mediator “low birth weight”), smoking appears to decrease mortality. This
paradox is most likely a result of the researchers having failed to consider (important)
characteristics related to both birth weight and mortality [6]. Consider, infants who
have a low birth weight because of their mothers’ smoking have a lower mortality rate
than other infants with a low birth weight whose mothers did not smoke; this may be
true if the low weight of the latter group is due to characteristics that entail a higher
mortality rate than is associated with smoking (such as birth defects).

Strategies to assess direct and indirect effects: Selection on observables
To prevent these kinds of issues, two types of strategies or sets of statistical restrictions
have primarily been used to plausibly assess direct and indirect effects. The first relies
on the assumption that researchers observe all characteristics that jointly affect the
treatment and the outcome, the treatment and the mediator, or mediator and the
outcome, which is known as the “selection on observables” assumption. This implies
that one can measure the direct and indirect effects on the outcome by comparing
groups in different treatments and mediator states that are comparable in terms
of such (observable) characteristics. Figure 1 illustrates such a set-up, in which the
observed characteristics (or covariates) are denoted by X, and may have an impact on
the treatment D, the mediator M, and the outcome Y [2]. As an illustration, consider
the first example presented above and let D represent a training program, M a further
program later in time, and Y employment. X reflects factors affecting all three variables,
for instance, education, work experience, age, profession, and other factors that likely
affect placement into training (D), further programs (M), and employment (Y).
As in the illustration on page 1, each arrow in Figure 1 represents the causal effect
of one variable on another. This selection on observables assumption is stronger
than that invoked in the “conventional” analysis of a (total) treatment effect. The

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

3

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

Figure 1. Direct and indirect effects under “selection on observables”
D

M

Y

X
Note: X=observable characteristics; M=mediator; D=treatment; Y=outcome of interest.
Source: Huber, M. “Identifying causal mechanisms (primarily) based on inverse probability weighting.” Journal of
Applied Econometrics 29 (2014): 920–943 [7].

latter concept merely requires that one must observe all characteristics that jointly
affect the treatment and the outcome, but does not consider their impacts on
the mediator.

Application opportunities for mediation analysis
Several studies discuss more or less flexible estimation approaches for the causal
framework shown in Figure 1, and predominantly consider applications for this
framework in biometrics, epidemiology, and political science. Similarly, contributions
to mediation analysis are on the rise in labor economics and policy evaluation. For
instance, one study decomposes the effects of the Perry Preschool program (an
experimental intervention targeting disadvantaged African American children in the
US) on later life outcomes into causal channels related to cognitive skills and personality
traits [8]. An investigation into the direct impact of the Job Corps program for
disadvantaged youth in the US on earnings considers “work experience” as a mediator
to account for potentially reduced job search effort during program participation, so
called “locking-in effects” [9]. The direct health effects from Job Corps are assessed
in another study, as well as the indirect effects via employment [7]. A different study
applies the mediation framework to the (widespread) decomposition of wage gaps
(e.g. between males and females or natives and migrants) into an explained component
(due to differences in mediators such as education, work experience, profession) and
an unexplained component (possibly due to discrimination and other unobserved
factors) [10].
These examples show that causal mechanisms play a role for a range of questions that
are interesting to policymakers, even though this is not typically recognized in most
modern policy evaluations. It is also worth mentioning that user-friendly software
packages have been developed, making the methods more and more accessible to
a broader audience [11]. This might pave the way to increased use of mediation
analysis in the context of policy evaluation with potential gains in the quality and
comprehensiveness of the derived results, which would lead to more effective policy
advice.

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

4

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

It is noteworthy that in Figure 1 the same set of covariates (observable characteristics)
is assumed to affect the treatment and the mediator (and the outcome). However, the
complexity of assessing causal channels increases if some covariates that affect the
mediator and the outcome are themselves influenced by the treatment; this is known as
“dynamic confounding.” In this case, the selection on observables assumption needs
to be augmented by further assumptions with respect to the treatment–mediator, the
covariates–mediator, or the mediator–outcome association. Thus, a trade-off exists
between the flexibility needed to handle confounding issues and the flexibility allowed
in the model specification. In other words, dynamic confounding issues require a more
rigidly designed evaluation model, which might limit the potential general application
of the model.
To date, mediation analysis with dynamic confounding has rarely been considered in
real-world applications, even though it represents an empirically relevant case. As an
illustration, consider the third example presented above and let D represent childcare
quality, M college graduation, and Y earnings later in life. Childcare quality (D) may
affect personality traits like self-confidence or motivation, which may affect both
the decision to go to college (M) and earnings (Y) later in life (through work-related
behavior).

Alternative strategies: Instrumental variable approach
In many empirical problems, the selection on observables assumption (i.e. the
assumption that all factors that jointly affect the treatment, the mediator, and
the outcome are observed) might not be plausible. This is the case if for some
characteristics that arguably influence the treatment decision, the mediator, and/or
the outcome, there are no or no appropriate measures available in the data. For
instance, if motivation, ambition, or innate ability drives participation in job-seeker
training (treatment) and further programs (mediator) as well as earnings (outcome),
but cannot be (adequately) measured, the selection on observables assumption fails.
An alternative strategy consists of using “instrumental variables” (IV), which must
affect the treatment and/or the mediator, but at the same time must not directly
influence the outcome (other than through the potentially altered treatment and/or
mediator).
Relatively few papers consider the evaluation of causal channels based on IV. One
such study assumes a randomly assigned treatment and a “perfect” instrument for
the mediator, which forces the latter to take a particular (and desired) value [5]. Such
perfect instruments are, however, hard to find in real-world applications. Considering,
for instance, the third example from above with college graduation as the mediator,
the random assignment of waivers for college tuition fees could serve as a plausible
instrument: waivers likely influence the decision to go to college while not having a
direct effect on outcomes later in life, such as earnings. However, waivers most likely
do not represent a perfect instrument, as they probably do not affect the college
decision of all individuals. That is, the mediator of some individuals may not react to
its prescribed instrument.
There is some discussion in the literature about the assessment of causal channels in
experiments based on “imperfect” instruments for the mediator (i.e. allowing for the

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

5

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

“non-reaction” of some individuals), while the treatment is assumed to be random
[12]. Under a particular experimental design, the causal channels can be measured for
those individuals whose mediator reacts to its instrument. This implies that direct and
indirect effects can be evaluated with double randomization of the treatment (e.g. random
assignment of high-quality childcare places) and an instrument for the mediator (e.g.
tuition waivers for school or college). This appears to be a promising strategy for the
future design of randomized trials aiming at evaluating policy interventions.
Further research considers two distinct instruments for both the treatment and the
mediator for various models and assumptions on the behavior of the mediator and its
instrument [1]. One interesting contribution is the evaluation of causal mechanisms
in cases where the instrument for the mediator may take many different values. In
practice, this may be implemented by randomizing a financial incentive (for instance,
for the mediator, “college attendance”) whose amount (randomly) varies among study
participants. An illustration of the framework is provided in Figure 2, where doubleedged arrows imply that causality may run in either direction. The first instrument
Z1 affects D, but not directly Y, i.e. it may only impact Y through its effect on D. The
second instrument Z2 affects M, but similarly, not directly Y. In such a setup, direct and
indirect effects may be measured despite the presence of the presumably unobserved
characteristics denoted by U, V, and W, which affect each other and D, M, and Y [2]. As
an example, assume that Z1 represents the random assignment to a childcare facility
and D the actual use of the childcare facility, which may differ from the assignment
if some families do not comply with the assignment. M is college attendance while
Z2 is a tuition waiver, whose amount may randomly vary such that the tuition fees of
some individuals are fully covered, while those of others are only partly or not at all
compensated. Y is income while U, V, and W are unobserved characteristics like family
background, ability, motivation, etc. In this framework, the unobserved variables
are likely associated with placement into early childcare facilities; for instance, more
highly versus less educated parents may systematically differ with respect to such
decisions. Family background (W) is also expected to affect the motivation to go to
college (V) and the motivation at work (U), the latter being a determinant of income
Figure 2. Direct and indirect effects with instruments
U
W
Y
D
M
Z1

Z2

V

Note: As an example, assume that Z1 represents the random assignment to a childcare facility and D the actual use of
the childcare facility, which may differ from the assignment if some families do not comply with the assignment. M is
college attendance while Z2 is the tuition waiver. Y is income while U, V, and W are unobserved characteristics like
family background, ability, motivation, etc.
Source: Frölich, M., and M. Huber. Direct and Indirect Treatment Effects: Causal Chains and Mediation Analysis
with Instrumental Variables. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8280, 2014 [1].

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

6

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

(Y). The causal mechanisms can nevertheless be evaluated if childcare slots (Z1) are
randomly assigned and actually affect the decision to use childcare, at least among a
subset of families. Similarly, the tuition waivers (Z 2) must induce some individuals to
go to college when being offered a waiver. Neither of the randomized variables Z1 or
Z 2 may, however, have a direct effect on income later in life. That is, they may affect Y
only through the treatment and the mediator, respectively.
Note that the causal framework depicted in Figure 2 could be augmented by observed
covariates that affect the instruments, the treatment, the mediator, the unobservables,
and the outcome, but this has been neglected here for the sake of simplicity. As an
example, assume that family wealth is observed in the data and affects education
decisions and later life earnings, as well as the chances to be assigned a childcare slot
or a tuition waiver for college. Therefore, childcare slots and waivers are randomly
assigned among families with the same wealth, but not across different wealth levels
(e.g. families with lower wealth might have higher chances to obtain a slot or waiver
than those with a higher wealth). Similarly to the selection on observables framework,
the IV assumptions necessary to measure causal channels are generally stronger than
those required for the IV-based assessment of (total) treatment effects.

Data requirements and availability
The appropriate strategy, considering either the IV or selection on observables
approaches (or neither), can vary from one empirical problem to another, and
must be assessed individually, considering the available data. First, the statistical
approaches generally only appear credible in the presence of panel data, which permit
measurement of the treatment, mediator, and outcome variables at different points in
time in order to match the causal framework considered in the illustration on page 1.
Second, the assumptions may only be plausible when a large number of variables are
observed, such that unobserved factors that jointly affect the treatment, the mediator,
and the outcome (in the case of selection on observables) or the instruments and the
outcome (in the case of IV) can be ruled out. For instance, if parental income affects
both the probability to be assigned to high-quality childcare or to obtain a college
tuition waiver and outcomes later in life (such as earnings), then parental income
needs to be observed by the researcher to avoid blurring the effects of childcare or
college attendance with the impact of parental income. This requires collecting rather
comprehensive data in terms of information on study participants.
Concerning the IV approach, a further caveat is that credible instruments (that do not
directly affect the outcome) may be hard to find in empirical data.
An alternative to the approaches outlined so far is the definition of a strict, so-called
“structural dynamic model,” which is explicit about any possible choices and channels
that are formally permitted within the assumed causal framework. An example is
found in a study that estimates schooling, work, and occupational choice decisions
based on a structural model [13]. Bluntly speaking, economic theory replaces the
need for selection on observables or IV assumptions. While this approach allows for
explicit focus on the causal channels of interest, its usefulness crucially depends on
the appropriateness of the narrowly specified theoretical model, which may not hold
up in reality.

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

7

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

LIMITATIONS AND GAPS
A survey of previous literature shows that the analysis of causal channels generally
requires stronger behavioral (or identifying) assumptions than merely evaluating the
(total) causal effect of a policy intervention. Partly related to that, data requirements
are also higher when evaluating causal channels. First, a comparably rich set of
characteristics needs to be observed, to the extent that selection on observables
and IV assumptions appears credible in the context of mediation analysis. However,
whether a data set is “rich enough” is ultimately not directly testable by means of
statistical methods, but needs to be judged on a case-by-case basis, in light of the
theoretical considerations and empirical evidence. Second, a panel data set is typically
required to measure the various factors at play at different times for the causal
framework under consideration (such framework consisting of an initial treatment,
an intermediate mediator, a final outcome, and possibly observed covariates that
need to be controlled for).
Furthermore, not all methods that are commonly applied in policy evaluation have yet
been transferred to the context of mediation analysis. For instance, the feasibility and
merits of approaches used in the context of “natural experiments” (interventions that
are not experimentally assigned by the researcher but nevertheless contain a quasirandom element) have not yet been considered for analyzing causal channels. This
represents a substantial area for the development of further evaluation methods to
address and analyze causal channels in future research.

SUMMARY AND POLICY ADVICE
Mediation analysis comes with the caveat that it generally implies higher behavioral
restrictions and data requirements than analysis of the (total) causal effect of some
policy intervention. However, if these concerns can be satisfactorily addressed, then
mediation analysis can allow for a better understanding of particular causal effects
through the evaluation of specific causal channels. This may result in more accurate
policy advice, particularly when it comes to the optimal design of (the various
components of) a policy intervention. For instance, mediation analysis permits
investigating specific aspects of an intervention that are of particularly high interest,
such as how important placement into training programs is as part of a counseling
process aimed at the reemployment of job-seekers.
The feasibility and attractiveness of mediation analysis in policy evaluation will likely
increase in a world with growing availability of rich data and appropriate software
packages. It is therefore recommended to take the assessment of causal channels into
consideration in (the design of) future policy evaluations. This can be most credibly
achieved by designing policy experiments with double (or two-step) randomization
of both the policy intervention (e.g. job-seeker counseling) and the mediating factors
(e.g. training participation). This will imply that several of the behavioral assumptions
discussed above are valid according to the chosen experimental design. Policymakers
may therefore want to engage or collaborate with researchers to run such experiments
in order to improve on “classical” policy evaluations of the total causal effect of an
intervention.

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

8

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

Acknowledgments
The author thanks two anonymous referees and the IZA World of Labor editors for
many helpful suggestions on earlier drafts. Previous work of the author (together with
Markus Frölich) contains a larger number of background references for the material
presented here and has been used intensively in all major parts of this article [1].

Competing interests
The IZA World of Labor project is committed to the IZA Guiding Principles of Research
Integrity. The author declares to have observed these principles.
©©Martin Huber

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

9

﻿
Martin Huber

|

Disentangling policy effects into causal channels

REFERENCES
Further reading
Imai, K., L. Keele, and T. Yamamoto. “Identification, inference and sensitivity analysis for causal
mediation effects.” Statistical Science 25:1 (2010): 51–71.
Pearl, J. “Direct and indirect effects.” In: Breese, J., and D. Koller (eds). Proceedings of the Seventeenth
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufman, 2001; pp. 411–420.

Key references
[1]

Frölich, M., and M. Huber. Direct and Indirect Treatment Effects: Causal Chains and Mediation Analysis
with Instrumental Variables. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8280, 2014.

[2]

Huber, M. The Evaluation of Causal Effects and Mechanisms in Empirical Economics. Latsis Foundation,
2014.

[3]

Huber, M., M. Lechner, and G. Mellace. “Why do tougher caseworkers increase employment?
The role of programme assignment as a causal mechanism.” Review of Economics and Statistics
(Forthcoming).

[4]

Baron, R. M., and D. A. Kenny. “The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 51:6 (1986): 1173–1182.

[5]

Robins, J. M., and S. Greenland. “Identifiability and exchangeability for direct and indirect
effects.” Epidemiology 3:2 (1992): 143–155.

[6]

Hernandez-Diaz, S., E. F. Schisterman, and M. A. Hernan. “The birth weight ‘paradox’
uncovered?” American Journal of Epidemiology 164:11 (2006): 1115–1120.

[7]

Huber, M. “Identifying causal mechanisms (primarily) based on inverse probability weighting.”
Journal of Applied Econometrics 29:6 (2014): 920–943.

[8]

Heckman, J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev. “Understanding the mechanisms through which an
influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes.” American Economic Review 103:6
(2013): 2052–2086.

[9]

Flores, C. A., and A. Flores-Lagunes. Identification and Estimation of Causal Mechanisms and Net
Effects of a Treatment under Unconfoundedness. IZA Discussion Paper No. 4237, 2009.

[10] Huber, M. “Causal pitfalls in the decomposition of wage gaps.” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 33:2 (2015): 179–191.
[11] Tingley, D., T. Yamamoto, K. Hirose, K. Imai, and L. Keele. “Mediation: R package for causal
mediation analysis.” Journal of Statistical Software 59:5 (2014): 1–38.
[12] Imai, K., D. Tingley, and T. Yamamoto. “Experimental designs for identifying causal
mechanisms.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A 176:1 (2013): 5–51.
[13] Keane, M. P., and K. I. Wolpin. “The career decisions of young men.” Journal of Political Economy
105:3 (1997): 473–522.

Online extras
The full reference list for this article is available from:
http://wol.iza.org/articles/disentangling-policy-effects-into-causal-channels
View the evidence map for this article:
http://wol.iza.org/articles/disentangling-policy-effects-into-causal-channels/map

IZA World of Labor | May 2016 | wol.iza.org

10

