Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Health Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/econbase

Workplace health promotion and labour market performance of
employees
Martin Huber a,∗ , Michael Lechner b,∗∗ , Conny Wunsch c,∗ ∗ ∗
a
b
c

University of Fribourg, Department of Economics, Fribourg, Switzerland
University of St. Gallen, Swiss Institute for Empirical Economic Research, St. Gallen, Switzerland
University of Basel, Department of Labour Economics, Basel, Switzerland

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 26 January 2015
Received in revised form 7 July 2015
Accepted 10 July 2015
Available online 8 August 2015
Keywords:
Firm health policies
Health circles
Health courses
Analysis of sickness absenteeism
Matching

a b s t r a c t
This paper investigates the average effects of ﬁrm-provided workplace health promotion measures on
labour market outcomes of the ﬁrms’ employees. Exploiting linked employer–employee panel data that
consist of rich survey-based and administrative information on ﬁrms, workers and regions, we apply a
ﬂexible propensity score matching approach that controls for selection on observables and time-constant
unobserved factors. While the effects of analysing sickness absenteeism appear to be rather limited, our
results suggest that health circles/courses increase tenure and job stability across various age groups. A
key ﬁnding is that health circles/courses strengthen the labour force attachment of elderly employees
(51–60), implying potential cost savings for public transfer schemes such as unemployment insurance
or early retirement schemes.
© 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

JEL classiﬁcation:
I10
I19
J32

1. Introduction
The health of employees is an important cost factor for ﬁrms and
a key determinant of the productivity of an economy. Rough estimates suggest, for example, that the bad quality of the air in US ﬁrms
alone lead to annual costs of about 250 bn. USD due to additional
medical expenses and lost productivity1 . For Germany, the country we study in this paper, BMAS (2014) estimates that in 2012 14
work days per worker were lost due to illness leading to production
losses of about 53 bn. EUR (corresponding to 92 bn. EUR in terms
of value added). Although such numbers must be interpreted with

∗ Corresponding author at: University of Fribourg, Department of Economics, Bd.
de Pérolles 90, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. www.unifr.ch/appecon.
∗∗ Corresponding author at: University of St. Gallen, Swiss Institute for Empirical Economic Research (SEW) Varnbüelstrasse 14, CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Tel.: +41 712242320. www.michael-lechner.eu.
∗ ∗∗Corresponding author at: Department of Labour Economics, Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Basel, Peter-Merian-Weg 6, CH-4002 Basel,
Switzerland. wwz.unibas.ch/wunsch.
E-mail addresses: martin.huber@unifr.ch (M. Huber), michael.lechner@unisg.ch
(M. Lechner), conny.wunsch@unibas.ch (C. Wunsch).
1
See New York Times (2013).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.07.002
0167-6296/© 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

care, they show the large potential gains that could be realised by
improving employees’ health. Thus, it is not surprising that health
issues receive considerable attention from national governments
as well as from supranational and international agencies2 .
Employers are of course also interested in the health of their
workforce. They may inﬂuence the health of their employees in
two different ways: First, they can provide a workplace that fosters,
or is at least not detrimental to, health. Second, they may encourage their employees to pursue a healthier life style in general by
providing information, (ﬁnancial and other) incentives, and opportunities (e.g. courses about healthy eating or subsidies for a ﬁtness
centre). Many larger ﬁrms implement such strategies and the economic beneﬁts for employers and the positive health effects for
employees have been documented extensively in the public health
literature3 . However, to the best of our knowledge the literature

2
An example for the latter at the European level is the European Agency for Safety
and Health at Work (OSHA, https://osha.europa.eu/en). At the international level,
safety at work is an important topic for the Internal Labour Organization (ILO, http://
www.ilo.org/global/topics/safety-and-health-at-work), for example.
3
For an excellent review of the literature see Kreis and Bödeker (2004), which
covers 25 high-quality review articles that summarize more than 400 studies, as

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

171

still lacks a thorough investigation of the effects of such measures
on the future labour market outcomes of the employees.
There are several reasons why this is important. First, workers with health problems have a higher probability of receiving
payments from public transfer systems, such as unemployment
insurance, welfare schemes or disability insurance, because they
face a higher risk of becoming (and staying) unemployed as well as
of leaving the labour market early (e.g. Böckerman and Ilmakunnas,
2009). Therefore, it is of interest for policy makers whether such
employer policies reduce dependency rates and if so, whether the
effects are sufﬁciently large to justify their active promotion using
public funds. Second, reduced turnover due to improved workerﬁrm matches does not only reduce turnover costs for ﬁrms, but
may also stabilise workers’ careers, which has positive effects on
their lifetime wealth (especially pension wealth) and on their contributions to the social insurance system. Finally, health-improving
measures adopted by ﬁrms may increase the labour market (and
ﬁrm) attachment of elderly workers, thus alleviating the negative
effects of the demographic change in terms of both shortage of
skilled workers and ﬁnancial strains on the pension system.
It is the objective of this paper to ﬁll part of this gap. We analyse the impact of selected health promotion measures provided
by ﬁrms on employees’ medium-term labour market outcomes in
Germany. Our study is based on unique linked employer–employee
data combining administrative records of individual labour market
histories with a panel survey of ﬁrm establishments and regional
statistics. Among many other characteristics, the panel survey contains information about the establishments’ provision of speciﬁc
health promotion activities. Based on this information, we separately investigate the effects of two classes of measures which
have been introduced by ﬁrms between 2002 and 2004: (i) a systematic analysis of sickness absenteeism in the ﬁrm, (ii) courses
to improve the health knowledge and health-seeking behaviour of
the ﬁrms’ employees, as well as (iii) so-called health circles where
health problems are discussed in groups with the aim of ﬁnding
ways to alleviate or overcome these problems. The administrative
records allow us to assess individual labour market outcomes in
terms of employment, unemployment, ﬁrm-provided early retirement, inactivity, and turnover from mid-2004 to the end of 2008.
Furthermore, they also provide individual worker characteristics as
well as information about the composition of the establishments’
work forces prior to any health promotion, which (in addition to the
ﬁrm characteristics from the survey and the regional information)
is available to control for selection into these measures.
As with any such study, it is most interesting to estimate the
effects of the health interventions on labour market outcomes
rather than merely uncovering statistical associations between
interventions and outcomes. In the absence of experimental evidence (which is apparently more difﬁcult and expensive to obtain
because labour market outcomes take longer to materialize than
many health outcomes) or any other exogenous variation inﬂuencing the establishments’ implementation of health promotion
measures, our identiﬁcation strategy has to rely on a different
approach. First, we eliminate the potential problem that workers
may select themselves into establishments offering health services:
On the one hand, we focus on establishments that had no such offerings by mid-2002, thus ‘equalising’ ﬁrms in that respect. On the
other hand, we only consider workers who joined the respective
establishments at least two years prior to mid-2002 to avoid that
individuals selectively choose their employers based on anticipating the introduction of health services. Second, by conditioning on
a rich set of ﬁrm, worker, and regional characteristics coming from

the various data sources, we account for the selective introduction
of such measures in some ﬁrms between 2002 and 2004. Third, we
use the panel structure of the data and take-out unobserved factors
and differential trends that determine labour market performance
by conditioning on long-run pre-implementation individual labour
market outcomes as well as pre-treatment measures of ﬁrm performance. Some placebo-like tests implicit in our results support
our strategy.
The results suggest that the investigated health promotion
activities have mixed effects on employees’ labour market outcomes. Analysing sickness absenteeism, an intervention that only
passively involves the employees, is found to have a rather limited
impact. This measure merely reduces the number of employer
changes of younger and mid-aged workers after 3–4 years to some
extent. In contrast, health courses and health circles, which activate employees directly, increase tenure in the studied ﬁrm and
reduce overall turnover. Moreover, in particular for older workers, who are most likely to suffer from health problems, these
measures strengthen their labour market attachment. They significantly increase employment by reducing unemployment and thus
reduce unemployment insurance payments, as well as by reducing
exits from the labour market via a speciﬁc type of ﬁrm-provided
early retirement scheme. Thus, besides the beneﬁcial effects on
ﬁrms and employees’ health documented in the previous literature, there are additional long-run beneﬁts for both employees and
social insurance systems.
The paper proceeds as follows: In the next section, we brieﬂy
describe several aspects of the health policies of German ﬁrms.
Section 3 is devoted to data and measurement issues and provides
selected descriptive statistics. Section 4 contains the discussion of
the identiﬁcation strategy and presents the estimator used. Section 5 empirically characterises the establishments implementing
the different measures and presents the estimated effects for the
health promotion activities considered in this paper. Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains extensive descriptive statistics, while
Appendix B contains additional results omitted from the main body
of the paper.

well as Sockoll et al. (2009), which is an update of the earlier survey and covers 40
review articles that summarize more than 1000 studies.

4
See the compilation of measures on http://www.enwhp.org/european-toolbox.
html.

2. Firms’ health policies in Germany
The Initiative for Health and Work (Initiative für Gesundheit und
Arbeit, IGA) provides a summary of legally required and voluntarily
provided measures of German ﬁrms to ensure and improve the
safety and health of employees at their workplace (IGA, 2009). Our
study focuses on voluntary measures that we will describe in more
detail in the following. With one exception, the German measures
are largely comparable to those of other counties4 . Comprehensive
and internationally comparable data on the use of health promotion measures at the work place is, unfortunately, rare. One of the
few data sources that provide at least some information is the European Survey of Enterprises on New and Emerging Risks, which has
been conducted by the European Agency for Safety and Health at
Work in 2009.
The left panel of Fig. 2.1 shows the share of establishments that
implemented different health and safety procedures in Germany
and Europe. 54% of German and 75% of European establishments
have at least some formalized health and safety procedure, 35%
of German, and 50% of European establishments routinely analyse sickness absenteeism and, respectively, 15% and 26% have
some procedure to deal with work-related stress. Moreover, the
right panel of Fig. 2.1 shows that the prevalence of the measures
quite strongly increases with establishment size with differences

172

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Fig. 2.1. Share of establishments answering ‘yes’ to various questions about workplace health promotion in 2009 by country and establishment size. Source: Own graph
based on data from the European Survey of Enterprises on New and Emerging Risks (ESENER) 2009. Data was retrieved from https://osha.europa.eu/sub/esener/en/frontpage on June 12, 2014. The right panel uses the data from all 31 European countries included in the survey.

Table 2.1
Share of establishments offering different health policies implemented by ﬁrms in
the IAB Establishment Panel 2002 and 2004.
Health measure
Analysis of sickness
absenteeism
Surveys of employees about
health risks in the workplace
Discussion groups about health
problems in the workplace
(health circles)
Courses about healthy
behaviour
Other than the above
mentioned
None of the above
Missing information
Total number of observations

2002

2004
0.30

0.29

0.19

0.18

0.10

0.09

0.14

0.15

0.12

0.10

0.54
0.005

0.56
0.004

15,682

16,063

Note: Multiple answers are possible. See Appendix C for the question underlying this
table.

of 20–30 percentage points between the smallest and the largest
ﬁrms.
The measures most frequently adopted by German ﬁrms coincide with the ones surveyed in the IAB Establishment Panel, which
is a representative survey of establishments5 in Germany and also
part of the data we use. Questions about health promoting activities of ﬁrms were included in the 2002 and 2004 questionnaires.
The shares of establishments that offer a respective health measure
are displayed in Table 2.1 for both years.
With about 30% of establishments using it, the most popular
measure is a systematic analysis of sickness absenteeism in the
ﬁrm. Because of reporting requirements, most ﬁrms have some
records on sickness absenteeism and a signiﬁcant share of them
uses these data to gain knowledge about potential problems and
possible solutions. To do so, ﬁrms analyse the incidence of absenteeism, average duration, causes, systematic patterns, and the
characteristics of the absentees and often compare their numbers to
other businesses in the same industry (IGA, 2009). Second, to collect
information on health risks and mental or physical pressures experienced or perceived by employees as well as potential complaints
almost 20% of ﬁrms conduct anonymous employee surveys (IGA,
2009). About 15% of ﬁrms offer or ﬁnancially support health courses

5
An establishment is either a single ﬁrm, or comprises all branches of a larger ﬁrm
within the same relatively narrowly deﬁned region and industry. In the following,
we will use the terms establishment and ﬁrm interchangeably.

that comprise talks, lectures, or activities to advise/train workers
on health issues such as a healthy working position, healthy eating
or drug use, or exercises to improve, for example, back muscles.
Furthermore, programmes for relaxation (e.g. yoga), stress management, and giving up smoking are (among others) also provided
(IGA, 2009).
About 10% of establishments make use of so-called health circles, which are a particularity of the German system. These are
discussion groups where employees and sometimes supervisors
collect information about work-related health problems, stress
or psychological pressures, and their causes and discuss possible
solutions. Usually, a health circle is set up for a limited period
(6–10 meetings) and followed by the creation of a within-ﬁrm
working group of employees, which seeks to implement improvements (IGA, 2009). It is important to note that such improvements
may in principle concern larger groups of (or even all) employees
in the ﬁrm, rather than the health circle participants alone. See
for instance Friczewski (1996) for a case study on health promotion activities in a German metal-processing ﬁrm, which included
health circles, or European Agency for Safety and Health at Work
(2009) for a case study on the implementation of health circles in
a Danish nursing home. 10–12% of ﬁrms also use a variety of other
measures such as free access to or subsidies for ﬁtness clubs, health
days, and sports events. Finally, about 55% of establishments do not
offer any health promotion measures.
3. Data and deﬁnition of the sample
3.1. Data
Our
empirical
analysis
relies
on
unique
linked
employer–employee data that combine different administrative and survey data sets from the Federal Employment Agency’s
Institute of Employment Research (IAB). The data is based on
the IAB Establishment Panel, which is a representative survey of
German establishments. It covers a broad spectrum of ﬁrm level
information including ﬁrm size, industry, legal form, biographical
data, structure of the work force (e.g. education, occupation,
share of males/females), employee turnover, vacancies and labour
demand, working hours, and human resource policies (e.g. ﬂexible
work time, inclination to recruit older workers). Furthermore,
there is information on training activities, ﬁnancial revenues
and proﬁts, investment activities, usage rate, technological and
organizational factors, and use of ﬁnancial support or subsidies,
among many others. The survey was ﬁrst conducted in 1993 and
is annually repeated. It is an unbalanced panel due to attrition and
the inclusion of new companies over time.

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

The information from the IAB Establishment Panel has been
merged with the so-called IAB Establishment History Panel that
includes a rich set of aggregate information on the ﬁrm’s employees. The variables describe the composition of a ﬁrm’s work force,
for example in terms of age, education, tenure, and earnings. They
are based on the employees’ social insurance records and are
constructed, for each year, from the cross section of all workers
employed in the ﬁrm on June 30.
For the ﬁrms in our sample, described in more detail below,
the social insurance records of their employees for the years
1990–2008 were merged to the ﬁrm data. They comprise employment, unemployment and earnings histories, as well as a rich set
of personal characteristics for all workers employed by the ﬁrms in
our data on June 30, 2002. The social insurance records have also
been used, for example, by Wunsch and Lechner (2008), Biewen
et al. (2014), Wunsch (2013), and Lechner and Wunsch (2013), with
a different sampling design, though. Finally, the data also contain
a rich set of regional characteristics, merged via county identiﬁers
from regional statistics, such as the federal state, urbanization, and
local labour market conditions.
3.2. Selection of the sample and deﬁnition of treatments
Our empirical analysis is based on a subsample of the establishments included in the IAB Establishment Panel (IAB-EP) in 2002.
For this project, we had access to a linked employer–employee
dataset that covers 2819 of the 15,682 establishments in the 2002
wave of the IAB-EP. Excluded are establishments with less than 100
employees (about 75% of all 2002 ﬁrms), the 25 largest ﬁrms, and
ﬁrms in the sectors agriculture, foresting, mining, energy, transportation, messaging, education and social insurance (about 20% of
all 2002 ﬁrms)6 . For research design purposes, we focus on estimating the effects of the introduction of workplace health promotion
measures between mid-2002 and mid-20047 . This requires, ﬁrst,
that we are able to measure the use of these measures both in 2002
and in 2004. Due to relatively high attrition rates8 in the IAB-EP
and a small amount of item non-response, this reduces the original
sample by 30%. Second, ﬁrms that already offered health promotion
measures in mid-2002 are also excluded. This affects a relatively
large number of ﬁrms, but is essential for identiﬁcation as we discuss in detail below9 . To avoid common support problems, we also
exclude ﬁrms in East Germany and Berlin (14%), as well as establishments with more than 800 employees (32%), with more than 10%
of temporary workers (0.8%), or ﬁrms indicating ‘problems because
their work force is too old’ (3%), as these characteristics almost

6

This paper is part of a larger cooperation project with the IAB, which focused on
intra-ﬁrm comparisons of workers in the primary and tertiary private sector. The
former required a sufﬁciently large numbers of employees per ﬁrms. For the latter,
sectors with large public shares in the past were excluded as well.
7
The main reason why we focus on newly started measures is that, we found it
impossible to develop a convincing identiﬁcation strategy that deals with ongoing
ones.
8
Table IA.3 of the online appendix presents descriptive statistics for selected
ﬁrm-speciﬁc, individual, and regional characteristics of the original linked
employer–employee data prior to the imposition of any sampling criteria. Speciﬁcally, the characteristics are provided for the raw sample observed in 2002 as well
as the subsample observed in both 2002 and 2004 in order to investigate any selective attrition. No important differences occur for most variables across the samples.
Therefore, attrition does not appear to be a serious issue in the original data.
9
Table A.1 in Appendix A contains cross tabulations of the answers to the
questions about the use of health promotion measures in 2002 and 2004 for all
establishments that participated in the 2002 and in the 2004 waves of the IAB Establishment Panel, have non-missing entries for the respective question, and are part
of the linked-employer–employee data used in this project. It shows the numbers
of establishments that are relevant for the empirical analysis before removing ﬁrms
with at least one measure in 2002 and before applying further restrictions to ensure
common support.

173

perfectly predict whether ﬁrms offer health promotion measures
in 2004. Hence, ﬁrms with and without such measures cannot be
‘made comparable’ with respect to these characteristics.
Our analysis is concerned with the individual-level outcomes of
the employees of the ﬁrms in our sample. We only consider workers of age 31 to 60 years (in June 2002). This condition ensures
that workers are sufﬁciently distant to educational choices and
statutory retirement age (65). As one may suspect that health
promotion activities have different effects on younger and older
workers (because the former are in general less subject to health
problems), we conduct the empirical analysis within three agespeciﬁc strata: 31–40, 41–50, 51–60. For design purposes explained
below, we also exclude workers with less than 2 years of tenure
with their employer10 .
As already mentioned in Section 2, the information about the
different health promotion activities comes from the 2002 and
2004 waves of the IAB-EP. Establishments were asked to state
which type of health promotion they implemented or supported,
or whether they did not implement or support any such measure (see Appendix C for the exact survey question). For reasons of
sample size and homogeneity, we group establishments into three
so-called ‘treatments’ based on this information. The ﬁrst group of
establishments indicated to analyse sickness-related absenteeism.
We use the short-cut Sickness Analysis for this intervention. The
second group consists of establishments that introduced health
circles and/or health courses (Health Courses) for their employees. In this group, 23% of establishments offered health circles, 91%
health courses, and 14% implemented both measures. It should be
noted that, unfortunately, it is unknown whether individual workers actually participate in Health Courses. It appears reasonable to
assume that participation in Health Courses has an effect at least as
large as the mere offer of such an opportunity (which may or may
not be taken up). Hence, the estimated effect of the offer represents a lower bound on the effect of actual participation of workers.
Note that the ﬁrst and second groups may overlap to some extent:
35% of the establishments offering Health Courses also used Sickness
Analysis. Of those implementing Sickness Analysis, 9% offered health
circles and 23% health courses. Unfortunately, sample size considerations prevent us from analysing the other options mentioned in
the survey (see Table 2.1)11 , or from analysing courses and health
circles separately. Finally, the third group (the control group or
so-called ‘non-treated’) consists of establishments that did neither
implement nor support any health measure and does therefore not
overlap with Sickness Analysis or Health Courses. The resulting sample sizes of ﬁrms and workers for each stratum and treatment are
displayed in Table 3.1.
3.3. Descriptive statistics
Table 3.2 contains a ﬁrst description of the data in terms of
the means of selected variables by age stratum and treatment
status12 . The four upper panels describe the underlying population

10
Note that stratiﬁcation on age conditional on a particular labour market attachment implies a particular selection pattern w.r.t. to health: Because healthier
individuals more likely remain in the labour force as they grow older, the stratum of
the 51–60 years old in our sample may be less comparable to the total (i.e. working
and non-working) population in this age group than in the case of the strata of the
younger workers (who have a higher labour force participation, as can be seen, for
instance, by their lower occupational disability rates).
11
The alternative of grouping them together with either Sickness Analysis or Course
would lead to a very heterogeneous group of measures. The estimated effects for
such a group would be very difﬁcult to interpret.
12
A more extensive set of descriptive statistics can be found in Tables A.2 and
A.3 in Appendix A. Due to the very large number of variables in the data (several hundred) we abstain from presenting statistics on all variables. They are
available on request. The information available in the administrative data is well

174

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table 3.1
Number of ﬁrms and individuals per stratum.
Health measure
Age
Number of ﬁrms
Number of workers

Analysis of sickness absenteeism
31–40
163
11,227

Health circles/courses

41–50
162
11,323

51–60
163
7670

31–40
197
9693

41–50
196
10,124

51–60
197
6732

Table 3.2
Selected descriptive statistics by stratum and treatment status.
Age in 2002 (stratum)

31 to 40

Health measure (treatment)

None

Establishment characteristics
Manufacturing sector
Number of employees
Problems with high absenteeism
Difﬁculties hiring skilled employees
Firm has a works council
Investment per employee/10,000

41 to 50
Sick-Ana

Course

None

51 to 60
Sick-Ana

Course

None

Sick-Ana

Course

0.46
301
0.13
0.35
0.80
0.75

0.62
304
0.09
0.39
0.86
0.68

0.29
361
0.10
0.44
0.89
0.35

0.47
304
0.13
0.33
0.84
0.77

0.58
301
0.11
0.38
0.87
0.72

0.25
372
0.10
0.46
0.91
0.33

0.43
298
0.11
0.33
0.86
0.74

0.58
310
0.10
0.38
0.89
0.65

0.27
364
0.09
0.51
0.90
0.30

Individual characteristics of employees (shares)
Women
0.39
0.17
Part-time employed
0.16
No vocational degree

0.37
0.15
0.17

0.49
0.24
0.09

0.42
0.19
0.22

0.44
0.18
0.18

0.55
0.28
0.12

0.44
0.25
0.22

0.43
0.22
0.18

0.52
0.30
0.15

Regional characteristics
Jobs per inhabitant aged 15–64
GDP growth 1994 to 2002 in %
Pre-treatment outcomes (individual level)
Share employed in past 10 years
Share unemployed in past 10 years
Share inactive in past 10 years
Outcome variables (individual level)
Cumulated months 2/2004
employed until end of 2/2008
Cum. months in early ret. 2/2004
Schemea until end of 2/2008
Cum. months unemployed 2/2004
Until end of 2/2008
Number of employer 2/2004
Changes until end of 2/2008
Tenure after June 30, 2004 in years
No. of employees (observations)

1.2
23
0.87
0.02
0.02
5.5
48.7
0.0
0.0
0.2
1.8
0.0
0.2
4.9
6247

1.0
22
0.85
0.02
0.02
5.6
49.3
0.0
0.0
0.2
1.8
0.0
0.2
5.2
4858

0.8
19
0.85
0.03
0.02
5.7
49.5
0.0
0.0
0.1
1.2
0.0
0.1
5.2
3312

1.1
24
0.92
0.02
0.01
5.6
48.6
0.0
0.1
0.3
2.3
0.0
0.2
5.1
6613

1.2
22
0.92
0.02
0.01
5.6
49.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
2.0
0.0
0.1
5.4
4622

0.7
19
0.90
0.02
0.01
5.7
49.9
0.0
0.1
0.1
1.5
0.0
0.1
5.5
3420

1.4
23
0.94
0.01
0.01
5.0
36.4
0.7
6.3
0.4
4.2
0.0
0.1
4.2
4366

1.2
22
0.95
0.01
0.01
5.0
37.1
0.7
5.5
0.4
3.7
0.0
0.1
4.5
3073

0.7
19
0.94
0.01
0.01
5.1
38.3
0.6
7.1
0.2
2.4
0.0
0.1
4.6
2135

Note: Statistics are based on the samples used for estimation. If not explicitly mentioned otherwise, variables are measured in 2002. 1/200× denotes the ﬁrst half of the 200×,
while 2/200× denotes the second half of this year. For all cumulated measures, accumulation begins in 2/2004.
a
The administrative records allow measuring one speciﬁc type of ﬁrm-provided early retirement scheme, which is called “Altersteilzeit” in German. Workers who want
to retire early sign a 6-year contract with the ﬁrm. They either work full-time at a reduced wage for 3 years and then stop working but continue to receive the same wage
for 3 more years (so-called block model, which is by far the most common case), or they work part-time at a reduced wage for the full 6-year period. In both cases, workers
are recorded in the data for the full 6-year period. Eligibility starts at age 55.

of workers and establishments prior to treatment in June 2002. The
lower panel contains outcome variables measured from July 2004
to December 2008.
Establishments that offer health courses and/or health circles
are quite distinct from the other establishments. On average, they
are larger and employ more women. This coincides with higher
shares of part-time employment and lower shares of ﬁrms active
in manufacturing. They also operate under more difﬁcult economic
circumstances, with lower regional GDP growth rates, fewer jobs
per inhabitant, and lower investments per employee. In contrast,
ﬁrms that analyse sickness absenteeism are quite similar to ﬁrms
that do not offer any health promotion measures. Somewhat larger
differences only occur with respect to the share of establishments

documented in Wunsch and Lechner (2008) and Lechner and Wunsch (2013).
For a detailed documentation of the variables available in the IAB Establishment Panel, see http://fdz.iab.de/de/FDZ Establishment Data/IAB Establishment
Panel/IAB Establishment Panel Working Tools.aspx and for those in the IAB
Establishment History Panel see http://fdz.iab.de/de/FDZ Establishment Data/
Establishment History Panel/Establishment History Panel Working Tools.aspx.

in the manufacturing sector, which is lower for the latter ﬁrms, and
investments per employee, which are higher.
Concerning potential reasons for introducing health promotion
measures, it is interesting to see that fewer ﬁrms who state to
have problems with high absenteeism introduce health promotion
measures. Instead, there is a positive correlation between the introduction of such measures and having a work council, i.e. a formal
representation of employees in the ﬁrm, as well as having difﬁculties to hire skilled workers. The latter seems to suggest that
health promotion measures may have been introduced by ﬁrms
to be more attractive for skilled workers. Also interesting from the
point of potential selection problems is the observation that the
labour market performance of a ﬁrm’s employees prior to treatment is very similar for all treatment groups and hence, seems to
be unrelated to whether or not ﬁrms introduce health promotion
measures at the work place. This suggests that by limiting our sample to workers with at least 2 years of tenure in the studied ﬁrms
before potential treatment we largely succeeded in eliminating bias
due to self-selection of workers into ﬁrms.
In terms of outcome variables, the differences between the three
groups of ﬁrms are mostly small. Somewhat larger differences are

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

mainly visible for the elderly who exhibit more time in employment and less time in unemployment if employed in ﬁrms that
offer health courses and/or circles rather than in ﬁrms that do not
offer any health promotion measures. This might be suggestive of
a positive effect of these measures in this age group. In the econometric analysis below, we will assess whether this is indeed the
case.

4. Empirical strategy
4.1. Identiﬁcation
We are interested in the effects of a ﬁrm offering a certain type of
workplace health promotion measure compared to not offering any
such measure on the labour outcomes of the ﬁrm’s employees. To
disentangle these effects from other determinants of the worker’s
labour market outcomes, two selection problems need to be solved.
First, workers may self-select into ﬁrms that offer certain health
promotion measures. We approach this problem by focusing on
ﬁrms that did not offer any such measure by mid-2002 and by only
considering workers who have been with the ﬁrm for at least 2 years
by mid-2002. Hence, all workers we include in the analysis joined
the ﬁrms at a point in time when they did not offer, and it was not
foreseeable that they will offer any health promotion measure.
The second selection problem arises because ﬁrms selectively
rather than randomly introduced health promotion measures
between mid-2002 and mid-2004. This also became visible when
comparing the characteristics of the ﬁrms across treatment states
in Section 3.3. To solve a large part of this problem, we exploit that
the data are very informative and allow us to capture most of the
potential drivers of the decision to introduce health measures and
of workers’ labour market outcomes (so-called ‘confounders’).
From a theoretical perspective, taking the view of a proﬁt
maximising enterprise, health promotion measures should be
introduced if they are cost-effective. Firm performance, which also
depends on the economic situation in the region and industry, is
one of the most obvious factors because it affects the ﬁnancial
means available for costly health promotion. Firm size appears
to be an important determinant of health promotion costs per
employee, given that introductory ﬁxed costs, e.g. for building up
the infrastructure, are non-negligible. The potential returns from
these measures depend on health risks that differ a lot by industry
and occupation but also by individual characteristics, such as education and age, because of different health knowledge and health
investments. They also depend on health problems evident in the
ﬁrm such as high absenteeism and high accident rates. Finally,
the bargaining power of employees may play an important role in
introducing health promotion measures. A strong representation
of workers’ interest, e.g. via a works council in the ﬁrm or strong
unionization, is more likely to enforce better working conditions.
All of these factors (that determine the ﬁrms’ decision to engage in
health promotion activities) are likely to affect individual workers’
labour market outcomes as well. Thus, they need to be controlled
for.
The importance of these factors is also conﬁrmed by several
empirical studies, mostly in the public health literature, which
have investigated the relationship between ﬁrm characteristics
and health promotion. Kenkel and Supina (1992) analyse data
from the US National Survey of Worksite Health Promotion Programs and ﬁnd that ﬁrm size, the share of females, and corporate
health insurance plans are positively correlated with health promotion, while employee turnover is negatively associated with the
latter. Based on the same data, Fielding and Piserchia (1989) conclude that health promotion activities also vary with industry and
region. Due to different institutional settings with respect to health

175

policies in the US and Germany, the results of studies using German
data appear particularly relevant in our context. Ulmer and Gröben
(2005) use a survey of ﬁrms in the German states of Hessia and
Thuringia and ﬁnd that ﬁrm size, the number of work accidents,
and proﬁt expectations are signiﬁcantly associated with health promoting activities. Hollederer (2007) uses the unrestricted version
of the IAB Establishment Panel and concludes that health promotion varies considerably with federal states, industry, ﬁrm size,
and the presence or absence of a works council. Based on a phone
survey among German insurance companies, Köhler et al. (2009)
argue that ﬁrm size and particular ﬁrm policies, such as human
resources and organizational development policies, are related to
health promotion. Finally, Jung et al. (2012) investigate the relationship between ﬁrm characteristics and the attitude towards health
promotion in a survey among German information and communication technology companies. They ﬁnd a ﬁrm’s market position
and the percentage of employees with an academic education to
be associated with a positive attitude towards health promotion
among small companies.
Table 4.1 summarizes the factors identiﬁed above from the theoretical considerations and the empirical literature and indicates
how we can capture them with our data. However, two factors
we cannot capture: The ﬁrst one is the availability of health insurance plans. However, this is not relevant in the German context
because health insurance is compulsory for everyone. The second
missing factor is related to accidents at work. This is only captured
indirectly by controlling for industry, occupation, and the share of
employment contracts in the last 10 years that ended due to prolonged illness of more than 6 weeks. These factors are very likely
to be strongly correlated with the rate of accidents. They represent
potentially important confounders per se.
Despite the richness of our data, one could still worry that
it does not exhaustively capture all variables that could possibly
confound treatment assignment and the outcome variables. For
instance, speciﬁc ﬁrm policies such as performance-related-pay
or fringe beneﬁts (like employee share ownership) might potentially be associated with both the provision of health measures
and employees’ attachment to the employer. To address the issue
of unobserved factors and differential trends that drive workers’
labour market outcomes, either via their current or past employers or other individual factors, we additionally exploit the panel
structure of the data which allows us to observe at least 10 years
of detailed pre-treatment labour market outcomes for all workers
in our sample. By conditioning on a variety of summary measures
of the workers’ labour market performance over the 10 years prior
to mid-2002, we not only take out any time-constant unobserved
factors (ﬁxed effects) that drive labour market outcomes, but also
any differential long-term trends. The latter is so because we essentially ‘equalize’ workers in terms of all kinds of dimensions of labour
market performance over the 10 years prior to mid-2002. Moreover, the set of ﬁrm characteristics includes variables about ﬁrm
performance in 2001 as well as changes in ﬁrm size from mid2001 to mid-2002. Hence, we can also control for pre-treatment
outcomes on the ﬁrm level, see Table 4.1. The exact speciﬁcation
we use for selection correction is described in the next section and
summarized in the last column of Table 4.1.
4.2. Estimation
Any estimator which eliminates selection based on observed
factors is built on the idea of comparing outcomes across units with
and without treatment that are similar with respect to observed
confounders in order to pin down the causal effect of the treatment.
Instead of using parametric OLS, we apply a propensity-scorematching estimator that deﬁnes similarity in terms of a function
of the probability to be treated conditional on the confounders. In

176

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table 4.1
Summary of potential confounders and control variables available in the data.
Potential confounders

Variables available in the data

Variables included in the estimation

Firm performance

Total revenues, evaluation of the business situation
and investments per employee in 2001, age of ﬁrm,
use of government subsidies, establishment is single
ﬁrm in 2002
Firm size in 6/2002, changes in ﬁrm size since 6/2001
Industry of the ﬁrm
Occupation of the employees

Investments per employee in 2001, age of ﬁrm, indicator
for no use of government subsidies, establishment is single
ﬁrm

Distribution of tenure in ﬁrm, number of entries and
exits over last year, tenure of individual employees
Indicators for whether ﬁrm has works council, is
subject to sectorial or ﬁrm-speciﬁc wage contract,
follows sectorial wage contract or is not subject to a
wage contract
Region dummies, unemployment rate, migration,
commuting, dummies for urban and rural areas,
population density, GDP growth, jobs per inhabitant
aged 15–64, earnings per capita
Gender, age, education, nationality,
part-time/full-time, earnings distribution,
occupations, blue-collar/white-collar job

Tenure of individual employees

Firm size
Industry of the ﬁrm
Occupation of the
employees
Turnover
Strong worker
representation

Region and its
economic situation

Composition of the
ﬁrm’s
workforce/individual
characteristics of
employees
Firm policies

Absenteeism
Number of work
accidents
Corporate health
insurance plans
Other factors and
differential trends

Several variables measuring various human resource
policies such as the support of employees with
families (e.g. childcare) and elderly workers (e.g. part
time work schemes or further training for elderly),
working time ﬂexibility (e.g. use of working time
accounts), restructuring activities, organizational
factors
Firm states to have problems with high absenteeism
–

–
More than 200 variables with half-yearly
measurements of different types of employment,
unemployment, receipt of unemployment insurance,
wage earnings, program participation and inactivity;
average duration and number of spells of
employment/unemployment/program
participation/inactivity, over the last 10 years

Firm size
Industry of the ﬁrm
Occupation of the employees

Indicators for whether ﬁrm has works council or is subject
to sectorial wage contract

Region dummies, GDP growth, jobs per inhabitant aged
15–64

Gender, age, education, foreigner status,
part-time/full-time, earnings, occupation

Firm has difﬁculties hiring skilled employees, ﬁrm uses
working time accounts

Firm states to have problems with high absenteeism
Industry of the ﬁrm, occupation of the employees, share of
employment contracts in the last 10 years that ended due
to prolonged illness of more than 6 weeks
Not relevant in the German context because of compulsory
health insurance for everyone
Fraction of time employed/unemployed/inactive in past 10
years

Note: All variables that are available in the data but are not used in the estimation have been tested in omitted variable tests. They are highly correlated with the included
variables and therefore do not add much explanatory power.

the program evaluation literature, this conditional probability is
referred to as propensity score (see Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983).
An advantage of these estimators is that they are semi-parametric
and therefore more robust than parametric methods like OLS, and
that they allow for ﬂexible effect heterogeneity (see Huber et al.,
2011, for an application in health economics).
We use radius matching on the propensity score with regression
adjustment as suggested in Lechner et al. (2011) to estimate the
average effects of the two measures relative to ‘no such measure’.
This estimator is more precise than nearest neighbour matching
(e.g. Dehejia and Wahba, 2002), remains consistent if either the
matching step is based on a correctly speciﬁed propensity score
model, or the regression model is correctly speciﬁed (so-called double robustness property, see e.g. Rubin, 1979; Joffe et al., 2004),
reduces small sample as well as asymptotic biases of matching
(Abadie and Imbens, 2006), and appears to perform well in ﬁnite
samples, also compared to OLS (Huber et al., 2013), but without
having to rely on functional form assumptions.
To obtain the propensity scores required for selection correction, we estimate 6 separate probit models, one for each measure
considered, Sickness Analysis and Health Courses, and each of the
3 age strata. The dependent variable in any subsample is zero for
workers in ﬁrms without any health measure and one otherwise (if

the respective health measure is provided). All probit models and
their results are presented in Appendix B.1. The speciﬁcations result
from the identiﬁcation issues discussed above as well as extensive
speciﬁcation tests for normality, heteroscedasticity and in particular omitted variables. The data contain hundreds of variables, a lot of
them being highly correlated. We started with a parsimonious speciﬁcation that included the most important potential confounders
according to the empirical literature and theoretical considerations
summarized in Table 4.1. Based on omitted variables tests for all
variables in the data, we sequentially added additional variables if
suggested by the test statistics.
The ﬁnal speciﬁcations include gender, age, foreigner status,
wages, tenure in June 2002, and indicators for part-time work,
education, and occupation to capture the main determinants of
workers’ labour market performance as well as occupational health
risks. Additionally, we include three summary measures of labour
market performance in the past 10 years as pre-treatment outcomes to take out any other time constant unobserved factors
that affect workers’ labour market performance. We also include
regional indicators and two variables capturing regions’ economic
performance as additional determinants of both individual labour
market performance and ﬁrm performance where the latter may
affect the ﬁnancial means available to introduce health promotion

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

measures. This is also true for ﬁrms’ age, size and investments per
employee as well as an indicator for establishments that do not use
any government subsidies or represent a single ﬁrm. To capture
health risks and other incentives to introduce health promotion
measures, we ﬁnally include indicators for the industry, for ﬁrms
stating to have problems with high absenteeism or difﬁculties hiring skilled workers, for having a works council or being subject
to a sectorial wage contract, and the share of employment contracts in the past 10 years that ended due to prolonged illness of
the employee.
It is important to note that, although we implement the matching on the level of the workers, by controlling for the main
confounding ﬁrm characteristics this procedure ensures that we
also match on the level of the ﬁrms on which selection into health
promotion measures actually takes place. In fact, by additionally
controlling for worker characteristics we go beyond selection correction on the ﬁrm level and take into account that individual
workers hired by different ﬁrms may also differ in ways that affects
both ﬁrm policies and their labour market performance.
Based on the estimated propensity scores, we ensure overlap
of the distributions of the covariates in the treated and nontreated samples by excluding treated individuals with scores higher
than the maximum among the nontreated and, similarly, nontreated individuals with scores lower than the minimum among
the treated. Applying the matching technique outlined above on
the common support results in very satisfactory balancing of the
covariate distributions across treated and untreated establishments. This holds not only for the variables entering the respective
propensity score speciﬁcations, but also for variables not explicitly
included, in particular ﬁrm characteristics and the large number
of workers’ pre-treatment labour market outcomes. Appendix D
shows the differences in means after matching for a number of
important ﬁrm and worker characteristics.13 To obtain correct
standard errors for this difference, we treated the tested variables as
outcomes and applied the same matching and bootstrap procedure
as for the actual outcomes.

4.3. Inference
p-Values to test whether the estimated effects are different from
zero are obtained from a block bootstrap that resamples establishments (rather than individuals) along with all their employees to
account for clustering at the establishment level14 . We use 499
bootstrap replications and compute the bootstrap t-statistics of the
respective average effects in each of the samples (recentred by the
estimated effect in the original sample). We then estimate the pvalue as the share of absolute bootstrap t-statistics that are larger
than the absolute t-statistic in the original sample15 .

13
Due to the very large number of tested variables, we abstain from presenting
the results of the balancing tests for all variables. They are available on request.
14
Abadie and Imbens (2008) show that for standard matching (based on a ﬁxed
number of comparison observations) bootstrap-based inference may be invalid.
However, our matching algorithm is smoother than the one studied by Abadie and
Imbens (2008) because it uses a variable number of (distance-weighted) comparisons and a regression adjustment. For this reason, the bootstrap is most likely a
valid inference procedure in our context.
15
See for instance MacKinnon (2006) for a discussion on bootstrapping symmetric
statistics. Since the theoretical results by Abadie and Imbens (2006) and the simulation based results in Huber et al. (2013) suggest that the estimator is asymptotically
normally distributed, bootstrapping the potentially pivotal t-statistic (computed
under the assumption that the weights obtained to compute the control group
are non-stochastic; see Lechner, 2002) has the advantage of potentially providing so-called asymptotic reﬁnements and thus improving inference. In addition we
also checked the bootstrap distribution of the estimated effects, rather than the
t-statistics. The results are similar (available on request).

177

5. Results
The individual administrative records allow computing a variety of outcome variables, which measure different dimensions
of employees’ labour market performance from July 2004 to
December 2008. With one exception, they are measured in the
second half of June or December of a given year, either as binary
labour market status indicators or income measures for that particular period, or as half-months in a given labour market status or
income from a given source accumulated since July 200416 . In the
following, we focus on those outcomes, which we consider the most
interesting. They include two measures of turnover, namely tenure
in the studied ﬁrm and the number of individual employer changes,
as well as the cumulated number of months in employment, unemployment, on unemployment insurance, or in the ﬁrm-provided
early retirement scheme (described in footnote 10 above). The
results for all other outcomes are only brieﬂy mentioned in the
text but they are available as an Online Appendix (Tables IA.1 and
IA.2).
Below we report the so-called average treatment effect (ATE)
of introducing Sickness Analysis or Health Courses compared to not
introducing any measure. This corresponds to the effect for an
employee randomly drawn from our estimation sample. Our empirical strategy also allows estimating effects for different groups of
employees. The average effect on the treated (ATET) [non-treated
(ATENT)] is the effect for an employee randomly drawn from the
subsample of ﬁrms, which did [not] introduce any health measure. Since ﬁrms adopting health measures and their employees
differ from those that do not, comparing ATE to ATET and ATENT is
informative about potential effect heterogeneity. In Appendix B.2,
we therefore additionally report the results for the ATET and the
ATENT. They are very similar suggesting that effect heterogeneity
is limited.
Table 5.1 reports the ATEs on tenure in the ﬁrm (in days from
July 2004 onwards) for each of the three age strata when using
radius matching with and without bias correction, in order to check
the robustness of the results. In any of the age groups, no (or in
one case only borderline) signiﬁcant effects are found for analysing
sickness absenteeism, while considerably larger and statistically
signiﬁcant effects are estimated for health circles/courses. After
ﬁrms introduced the latter measures, employees stayed with the
ﬁrm for 3.5–6 more months than if the ﬁrm had not introduced
these measures. Hence, establishments offering these measures
seem to be employers that are more attractive. Moreover, this
suggests that ﬁrms can save turnover costs by introducing such
measures. As neither the effect estimates, nor the signiﬁcance levels for this or any other outcome variable differ importantly across
matching algorithms, the remaining discussion and ﬁgures focus
on the results under matching with bias correction only.
There is also evidence, though somewhat weaker, that health
circles/courses stabilise workers’ careers more generally by reducing the number of employer changes. Fig. 5.1 plots half-yearly
measurements of the ATEs of introducing the respective health promotion measure compared to not introducing any measure from
December 2004 to December 2008. Triangles appear if the effects
are signiﬁcant on the 5% level and diamond symbols when they are
signiﬁcant on the 10% level. About 3 years after introduction of the
measures we ﬁnd signiﬁcant reductions in the number of employer
changes of about 4 percentage points for workers aged 51–60, of
5–6 percentage points for 41–50-year olds, and of roughly 8 percentage points for workers aged 31–40. We also estimate drops in

16
To determine a unique labour market status for each period, the administrative
records have been arranged as a panel data set with one observation for each half
of a month in the period 1990–2008.

178

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table 5.1
Average effects on tenure in the original establishment in days.
Matching with bias correction

Matching without bias correction

Effect

Effect

Health promotion measure

Age

Rounded p-value in %

Analysis of sickness
absenteeism

31–40
41–50
51–60

83
48
54

16
36
28

89
57
60

Rounded p-value in %
10
24
18

Health circles/courses

31–40
41–50
51–60

187**
108*
147**

3
10
1

180**
95*
147***

1
10
0

* ** ***
, ,
Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications). Tenure refers
to the time with the establishment after treatment from July 2004 onwards. Tenure before that is a control variable.

the number of employer changes of roughly 4–5 percentage points
for workers aged 50 or younger about 3 years after ﬁrst analysing
sickness absenteeism. However, few point estimates are signiﬁcant.
Figs. 5.2–5.4 plot the ATEs on the cumulated number of
months in unsubsidised employment, unemployment or the ﬁrmprovided early retirement scheme in a similar fashion as Fig. 5.1.
Tables B3 and B4 in Appendix B.3 report the results for the binary
labour market status indicators measured in the second half of
June or December of a given year (so-called point-in-time estimates). There are no signiﬁcant effects of introducing the analysis
of sickness absenteeism on any outcome or age group. The only
quantitatively larger effects appear for older workers in terms of
participation in the ﬁrm-provided early retirement scheme, which
is reduced by more than one month. The cumulated effects are
never signiﬁcant, while some of the longer run point-in-time estimates are marginally signiﬁcant (see Table B3). We do not ﬁnd
any signiﬁcant or quantitatively noteworthy effects of introducing
health circles/courses for workers aged 50 or younger either.
However, there are interesting effects for older workers. After
the introduction of health circles/courses, workers aged 51–60 are
4–7 percentage points more likely to be employed than without
the introduction of the measures and in total, they spend about 3
months more in unsubsidised employment over the 4.5-year period
following June 2004. The effects on earning are also positive but not
signiﬁcant (see Table IA.2 in the Online Appendix). Moreover, during the ﬁrst 2 years, the elderly are 3–4 percentage points less likely
to be unemployed and receive unemployment insurance payments,
and in total they spend about 1.5 months less in unemployment.
During the ﬁrst 1.5 years, they are also roughly 3–4 percentage
points less likely to participate in the ﬁrm-provided early retirement scheme, which accumulates to being almost one month less
in this scheme. Workers also spend about 2.5 months less out-of
the labour force but the effects are not signiﬁcant (see Table IA.2 in

the Online Appendix). Consequently, tax revenues and social insurance contributions increase while expenditures on unemployment
and pension insurance fall.
The cumulated effects may seem small at ﬁrst sight. However,
because of the tenure requirement we impose for identiﬁcation
purposes, the workers in our sample have a quite strong labour
market attachment (they were employed for 85–95% of the 10
years before July 2002, see Table 3.2). Hence, unemployment risk
and incentives to retire early should be comparatively low, which
implies that the effects on (the relatively few) workers who would
become unemployed or decide to retire early in the absence of the
health measures must be quite large. This is conﬁrmed by the relatively large point-in-time effects. It follows that the average effects
for older workers with weaker labour market attachment might
be even larger. However, for the sake of minimising self-selection
into ﬁrms, we here focus on a more narrowly deﬁned population
of workers.
The results also provide some insights on the credibility of our
identiﬁcation strategy. First, if controlling for the variables available in the data was not sufﬁcient for removing selection bias, one
might see immediate ‘effects’ in the ﬁgures presented above, as
there is no obvious reason why selection effects would need time
to materialize—as opposed to true effects. However, effects immediately after introducing the health measures are largely absent
and never signiﬁcant, thus providing no evidence against the validity of our selection-on-observables strategy. Second, the fact that
we mainly ﬁnd effects for older workers, who are most likely to
suffer from health problems, but not for younger workers in the
same ﬁrms also speaks against ﬁrm level selection effects, which
should be similar for all employees of a ﬁrm. Finally, the ﬁrms which
introduced health circles/courses are operating in less favourable
labour markets than those which do not (see Table 3.2), suggesting
that selection effects should lead to worse labour market outcomes

Fig. 5.1. Average effects on the number of employer changes. Note: Lines denote average treatment effects on the for respective age stratum. The symbol ‘’ denotes
signiﬁcance at the 5% level, while ‘’ denotes signiﬁcance at the 10% level. The horizontal axis measures the number of months since June 2004 (half-yearly measurements
in June and December of each year). Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

179

Fig. 5.2. Average effects on cumulated unsubsidised employment in months. Note: Lines denote average treatment effects on the for respective age stratum. The symbol
‘’ denotes signiﬁcance at the 5% level, while ‘’ denotes signiﬁcance at the 10% level. The horizontal axis measures the number of months since June 2004 (half-yearly
measurements in June and December of each year). Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

Fig. 5.3. Average effects on cumulated unemployment in months. Note: Lines denote average treatment effects on the for respective age stratum. The symbol ‘’ denotes
signiﬁcance at the 5% level, while ‘’ denotes signiﬁcance at the 10% level. The horizontal axis measures the number of months since June 2004 (half-yearly measurements
in June and December of each year). Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

Fig. 5.4. Average effects on months in ﬁrm-provided early retirement schemes. Note: Lines denote average treatment effects on the for respective age stratum. The symbol
‘’ denotes signiﬁcance at the 5% level, while ‘’ denotes signiﬁcance at the 10% level. The horizontal axis measures the number of months since June 2004 (half-yearly
measurements in June and December of each year). Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

of their employees. The fact that we ﬁnd opposite effects supports
our identiﬁcation strategy.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we complement the literature on the effects of
ﬁrm-provided workplace health promotion measures on workers’
health and ﬁrms’ economic situation by studying the effects on
future labour market outcomes of the ﬁrms’ employees. Identiﬁcation exploits rich survey and administrative data and is based
on a combination of a selection-on-observables assumption and
a particular usage of the panel structure of the data to control
for time-constant unobserved factors and differential time trends.

For estimation, we apply semi-parametric radius matching on the
propensity score with regression adjustment, which is ﬂexible in
terms of functional form assumptions and permits arbitrary effect
heterogeneity with respect to observables.
Our results suggest that analyses of sickness absenteeism have
a rather limited impact on individual labour market outcomes by
slightly reducing the number of job changes for younger workers. In
contrast, health circles and health courses, which require an active
engagement of the employees, appear to have a more profound
impact. They decrease the number of job changes in general (and
more profoundly than the analyses of sickness absenteeism) leading to more stable work careers. Moreover, they increase tenure
by 4–6 months for all age groups, which implies savings for ﬁrms

180

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

in terms of turnover costs that come in addition to health-related
cost savings documented in the existing (public health) literature.
Finally and maybe most important from a policy perspective, health
circles and health courses also improve the labour market attachment of older workers as they increase employment and reduce
unemployment of these workers. They also reduce participation in special ﬁrm-provided early retirement schemes. Therefore,
tax revenues and social insurance contributions increase while
expenditures on unemployment and pension insurance fall. Again,
this comes on top of the positive effects on workers’ health and the
corresponding health-related savings mentioned elsewhere.
However, our analysis would be incomplete without also
considering the costs of the advocated measures. In the case of
health circles, they mainly consist of the working time devoted
to participation, while the direct ﬁnancial burden is rather low
(at least if organized in the workplace). Of course, depending on
a health circle’s outcome, its practical implementation could, however, be more expensive (e.g. investment into new equipment
or reorganization of production processes). Concerning health
courses, the costs vary considerably depending on the content
and intensity/length of the intervention. In 2015, the price range
for (externally provided) courses is roughly between 50 and
200 EUR per person (see for instance http://www.bkkrwe.de/
gesundheitskurse.html, accessed on June 30th 2015). Even though
we lack a cost-beneﬁt analysis for these measures as neither their
frequency nor the number of participants (in each age group) is
observed in the data, we suspect (based on some back of the envelop
calculations) that the ﬁrm-related and social beneﬁts outweigh the
costs. Thus, it appears advisable for policy makers to encourage
ﬁrms to introduce health circles or health courses, especially given
the demographic development in many countries.
However, a word of caution appears in order concerning our
treatment categories: As they are deﬁned on a rather aggregate
level (due to the way they are measured in the survey), several
interesting results might be masked. For example, the overall positive effects on the labour market attachment found for health circles
and courses may hide the possibility that some of the measures
summarized in this treatment category are relatively more effective, while others are rather ineffective. Further research should
be devoted to a more detailed deﬁnition/distinction of the treatments and a more thorough investigation of heterogeneity patterns
to permit a more precise targeting of health promotion activities
to groups that beneﬁt most. Possible dimensions of interest are
speciﬁc industries and occupations as well as particular types of
employees with speciﬁc health risks, none of which could be investigated in this study due to sample size issues.

Table A1
Transition matrix for the use of different health measures.
2004
No
2002
(a) Analysis of sickness absenteeism
No
460
Yes
340
800
Total

Yes

Total

308
1123
1431

768
1463
2231

(b) Surveys of employees about health risks in the workplace
1102
344
No
354
431
Yes
Total
1456
775

1446
785
2231

(c) Discussion groups about health problems in the workplace (health circles)
No
1456
218
1674
Yes
276
281
557
Total
1732
499
2231
(d) Courses with information about healthy behaviour
No
1230
322
Yes
253
426
Total
1483
748

1552
679
2231

Note: The numbers refer to all establishments, which participated in the 2002 and
in the 2004 waves of the IAB Establishment Panel, have non-missing entries for the
respective question and are part of the linked-employer–employee data used in this
project. The shaded cells indicate the ﬁrms that are relevant for the empirical analysis before removing ﬁrms with at least one measure in 2002 and before applying
further restrictions to ensure common support.

Appendix B. Additional results
B.1. Propensity scores
In this section, we show the detailed speciﬁcation and estimation results for the propensity scores used in the estimation.
.
B.2. Average treatment effects for the treated and non-treated
As already mentioned in the main text (see Section 5.2), one way
to assess potential effect heterogeneity is to compare the average
effects for workers in establishments with or without any health
promotion measure to the average effects for all workers.
.
B.3. Point-in-time estimates
.
Appendix C. More details on the deﬁnition of the treatment

Acknowledgements
Michael Lechner and Conny Wunsch are also afﬁliated with
CESIfo, Munich, and IZA, Bonn. Michael Lechner has further
afﬁliations with CEPR and PSI, London, and IAB, Nuremberg. This
project received ﬁnancial support from the Institut für Arbeitsmarkt und Berufsforschung, IAB, Nuremberg (contract 8104), and
from the St. Gallen Research Center for Aging, Welfare, and Labor
Market Analysis (SCALA). We are grateful to the staff of the
Forschungsdatenzentrum (FDZ) of the Federal Employment Ofﬁce
(BA) in Nuremberg, where the estimations were conducted, who
provided kind and skillful assistance. We are also very grateful to
two anonymous referees of this journal for providing constructive
comments that proved very helpful when revising the manuscript.
Appendix A. Further descriptive statistics
.

.
Note that indicating multiple measures is possible. The ﬁrst
treatment (Sickness Analysis) used in the main body of the paper
consists of workers in those establishments indicating ‘A’, the second one consists of workers in establishments indicating ‘C’ and/or
‘D’ (Course). In either case, the control group consists of those establishments indicating option ‘F’ (only).
Appendix D. Match quality
.
Appendix E. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.07.
002

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

181

Table A2
Outcome variables.
Age of worker in 2004

31 to 40

Establishment health policy (treatment)

None

SickA

41 to 50

Employed end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.92
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.89

0.93
0.92
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.90
0.90
0.90

Minor employment
end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05

In early retirement
scheme end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

Unemployed end of

Cour

51 to 60

None

SickA

Cour

None

SickA

0.94
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.91
0.90
0.90

0.92
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.88
0.87

0.93
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.87

0.95
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.90

0.81
0.76
0.72
0.69
0.66
0.62
0.60
0.56
0.54

0.82
0.78
0.74
0.70
0.67
0.64
0.60
0.57
0.54

Cour
0.84
0.79
0.76
0.73
0.70
0.66
0.63
0.59
0.57

0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.04
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04

0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.07

0.05
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.06

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.11

0.11
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09

0.10
0.11
0.11
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.04

0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.07
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.04

0.07
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04

0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03

Received
unemployment
beneﬁts end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02

0.02
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.07
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.03

0.06
0.06
0.06
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.02

Out-of-labour-force
end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08

0.03
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07

0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07

0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08

0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.09

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07

0.12
0.16
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.29
0.32
0.37
0.41

0.11
0.14
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.28
0.32
0.37
0.40

0.12
0.15
0.19
0.21
0.24
0.29
0.32
0.36
0.39

Cumulated half months
of employment until
end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

11.07
21.97
32.78
43.53
54.36
65.16
75.94
86.65
97.36

11.17
22.16
33.13
44.09
55.09
66.07
76.99
87.82
98.64

11.30
22.34
33.38
44.40
55.39
66.33
77.24
88.11
98.99

11.16
22.16
33.06
43.85
54.68
65.44
76.09
86.69
97.25

11.28
22.42
33.49
44.48
55.41
66.25
77.05
87.67
98.17

11.48
22.70
33.90
45.01
56.08
67.06
78.03
88.94
99.78

9.89
19.21
28.07
36.39
44.43
52.08
59.35
66.22
72.79

9.97
19.48
28.57
37.11
45.32
53.14
60.55
67.50
74.15

10.22
19.84
29.12
38.05
46.66
54.74
62.46
69.64
76.55

Cumulated
half-months in minor
employment until end
of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007

0.45
0.98
1.50
2.06
2.62
3.21

0.50
1.12
1.72
2.32
2.93
3.61

0.47
1.03
1.57
2.13
2.70
3.35

0.39
0.84
1.28
1.76
2.24
2.74

0.46
0.95
1.40
1.95
2.45
2.98

0.37
0.76
1.15
1.62
2.10
2.52

0.48
1.02
1.57
2.14
2.78
3.42

0.47
0.95
1.43
1.97
2.55
3.17

0.55
1.05
1.56
2.14
2.78
3.43

182

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table A2 (Continued)
Age of worker in 2004

31 to 40

Establishment health policy (treatment)

None

41 to 50
SickA

Cour

None

51 to 60
SickA

Cour

None

SickA

Cour

2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

3.75
4.32
4.87

4.21
4.80
5.41

3.94
4.51
5.08

3.23
3.74
4.25

3.50
4.04
4.55

2.93
3.44
3.92

4.12
4.85
5.66

3.87
4.62
5.43

4.10
4.76
5.45

Cumulated
half-months in early
retirement scheme
until end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.07
0.13
0.21

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.06
0.10

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.10
0.17
0.28

1.41
2.80
4.21
5.63
7.07
8.52
9.93
11.29
12.61

1.31
2.58
3.86
5.16
6.45
7.65
8.81
9.92
11.03

1.28
2.51
3.82
5.33
7.01
8.76
10.59
12.37
14.14

Cumulated half months
in unemployment until
end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.43
0.87
1.36
1.84
2.25
2.63
3.00
3.36
3.68

0.41
0.89
1.36
1.82
2.21
2.57
2.91
3.30
3.66

0.26
0.57
0.88
1.19
1.47
1.73
1.94
2.17
2.39

0.49
0.99
1.56
2.15
2.69
3.18
3.69
4.16
4.60

0.38
0.85
1.33
1.81
2.27
2.73
3.15
3.55
3.95

0.27
0.64
1.03
1.42
1.77
2.08
2.36
2.65
2.93

0.79
1.70
2.76
4
5.09
6.10
7.02
7.84
8.37

0.75
1.59
2.42
3.43
4.41
5.27
6.07
6.75
7.31

0.43
0.99
1.57
2.20
2.76
3.35
3.88
4.41
4.84

Cumulated half months
in income support
(‘Hartz IV’) end middle
of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.00
0.15
0.30
0.46
0.62
0.77
0.93
1.08
1.22

0.00
0.20
0.40
0.61
0.83
1.04
1.24
1.45
1.65

0.00
0.12
0.22
0.33
0.45
0.58
0.70
0.81
0.93

0.00
0.10
0.19
0.30
0.41
0.52
0.62
0.72
0.83

0.00
0.13
0.26
0.41
0.56
0.73
0.89
1.07
1.24

0.00
0.09
0.20
0.31
0.43
0.57
0.71
0.85
0.96

0.00
0.06
0.13
0.22
0.32
0.44
0.55
0.68
0.80

0.00
0.09
0.17
0.25
0.35
0.46
0.59
0.74
0.87

0.00
0.08
0.14
0.20
0.28
0.37
0.47
0.58
0.69

Part-time employed
end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.17
0.18
0.18
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.19

0.16
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17

0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.26
0.26
0.26
0.26

0.19
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20

0.19
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.19

0.28
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.29

0.25
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.22
0.21
0.21

0.21
0.22
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.19

0.29
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.27
0.25
0.25

Tenure after June 30, 2004 in days
Half monthly earnings
1/2005
2/2004 end of
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008
Cumulated
half-months in
Part-time employment
until end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

Cumulated
earnings/100 until end
of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

Cumulated
half-months in
out-of-labour-force
until end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006

1777
1184
1157
1152
1150
1144
1139
1138
1127
1128
2.09
4.22
6.35
8.56
10.82
13.06
15.34
17.65
19.97
142
281
420
557
695
831
968
1100
1230
0.48
1.09
1.73
2.41

1897
1196
1175
1173
1175
1179
1172
1167
1148
1151
1.88
3.84
5.78
7.79
9.82
11.92
13.96
15.98
18.02
144
285
426
567
708
848
989
1126
1265
0.39
0.90
1.40
1.93

1899
1179
1164
1164
1152
1153
1129
1133
1131
1132
2.96
6
9.03
12.05
15.12
18.25
21.38
24.46
27.55
141
280
420
558
696
832
968
1103
1239
0.44
1.05
1.68
2.31

1872
1226
1197
1188
1173
1169
1143
1142
1124
1116
2.30
4.64
6.96
9.32
11.68
14.05
16.48
18.90
21.35
147
291
434
575
715
852
989
1120
1250
0.33
0.76
1.24
1.74

1973
1232
1208
1205
1188
1183
1167
1159
1115
1114
2.25
4.56
6.84
9.24
11.59
13.96
16.32
18.66
20.99
148
293
438
580
723
863
1003
1137
1271
0.31
0.65
1.05
1.48

2001
1234
1194
1193
1159
1157
1130
1137
1113
1107
3.42
6.92
10.40
13.95
17.48
21
24.49
28.04
31.54
148
291
434
573
712
848
984
1118
1251
0.23
0.59
0.96
1.38

1540
1062
982
932
870
834
769
734
671
642
3.05
6.01
8.88
11.71
14.52
17.26
19.92
22.48
25.01
129
249
363
469
571
665
755
837
916
1.29
3
4.98
7.27

1630
1098
1031
990
920
888
822
773
709
671
2.61
5.25
7.79
10.33
12.85
15.31
17.68
19.99
22.26
133
259
380
493
602
702
798
885
967
1.25
2.84
4.80
7.09

1667
1039
969
939
873
839
766
732
671
648
3.60
7.01
10.39
13.76
17.15
20.53
23.84
26.96
29.97
126
243
358
464
566
660
749
831
910
1.32
3.08
5.12
7.47

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

183

Table A2 (Continued)
Age of worker in 2004

31 to 40

Establishment health policy (treatment)

None

41 to 50
SickA

Cour

None

51 to 60
SickA

Cour

None

SickA

Cour

2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

3.12
3.88
4.69
5.56
6.47

2.50
3.11
3.79
4.53
5.29

3.01
3.79
4.63
5.50
6.38

2.31
2.99
3.77
4.64
5.57

2.01
2.65
3.37
4.26
5.29

1.89
2.55
3.23
3.99
4.83

10.01
13.23
16.90
21.07
25.80

9.78
12.98
16.63
20.84
25.47

10.19
13.44
17.10
21.30
25.85

Number of employer
changes until end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.00
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.09
0.12
0.16
0.19
0.22

0.00
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.14
0.19

0.00
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.10

0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.08
0.10
0.13
0.15
0.17

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.14

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.08

0.00
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.08
0.09
0.11

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.08

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.07

Number of
terminations of
employment due to
longer illness until end
of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10

0.01
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.11

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.12

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.12

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.13

0.02
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.12
0.14

0.02
0.03
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.13
0.14
0.15

0.02
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.13
0.14

No. of employees (observations)

6247

4858

3312

6613

4622

3420

4366

3073

2135

Note: 1/200× denotes the ﬁrst half of the 200×, while 2/200× denotes the second half of this year.

Table A3
Selection of variables determined prior to treatment.
Age in 2002

31 to 40

41 to 50

Establishment health policy (treatment)

None

SickA

Cour

None

SickA

Cour

None

SickA

Cour

Women (share)
Age (in years)
Foreigner (share)
Half-monthly earnings in June 2002/1000
Tenure in June 2002 in years
Part-time employed (share)
No vocational degree (share)
University or polytechnic degree (share)
Vocational degree missing (share)
Occupation in manufacturing (share)
Low skilled occupation (share)
Occupation in construction (share)
Technical occupation (share)
Manufacturing (sector) (share)
Construction, trade (sector) (share)
Share employed in past 10 years
Share unemployed in past 10 years
Share inactive in past 10 years
Central German states (share)
Jobs per inhabitant aged 15–64
Growth of regional GDP 1994 to 2002 in %
Number of employees in establishment
Problems with high absenteeism
Difﬁculties hiring skilled employees (share)
Investment per employee/10,000
No use of government subsidies
Subject to sectorial wage contract (share)
Firm-speciﬁc wage contract (share)
Firm follows sectorial wage contract (share)
Not subject to general wage contract (share)
Firm has a work council (share)
Firm with single establishm. (share)
Establishment is headquarter (share)
Establishment is regional unit (share)
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness in past 10 y

0.39
35.9
0.06
1.26
2.56
0.17
0.16
0.08
0.04
0.10
0.13
0.13
0.19
0.46
0.20
0.87
0.02
0.02
0.34
1.18
0.23
301
0.13
0.35
0.75
0.52
0.80
0.11
0.07
0.02
0.80
0.43
0.28
0.22
0.17

0.37
35.8
0.09
1.27
2.51
0.15
0.17
0.08
0.08
0.22
0.09
0.11
0.23
0.62
0.14
0.85
0.02
0.02
0.31
1.00
0.22
304
0.09
0.39
0.68
0.52
0.79
0.08
0.15
0.07
0.86
0.48
0.25
0.24
0.17

0.49
35.9
0.05
1.26
2.62
0.24
0.09
0.09
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.29
0.13
0.85
0.03
0.02
0.41
0.84
0.19
361
0.10
0.44
0.35
0.40
0.71
0.09
0.11
0.01
0.89
0.51
0.15
0.31
0.18

0.42
45.3
0.05
1.30
2.90
0.19
0.22
0.08
0.04
0.11
0.14
0.13
0.18
0.47
0.18
0.92
0.02
0.01
0.35
1.13
0.24
304
0.13
0.33
0.77
0.51
0.81
0.11
0.06
0.02
0.84
0.44
0.24
0.24
0.17

0.44
45.3
0.06
1.30
2.83
0.18
0.18
0.07
0.09
0.20
0.12
0.11
0.22
0.58
0.14
0.92
0.02
0.01
0.31
1.20
0.22
301
0.11
0.38
0.72
0.52
0.79
0.09
0.13
0.07
0.87
0.51
0.23
0.23
0.17

0.55
45.2
0.05
1.28
3.05
0.28
0.12
0.08
0.06
0.09
0.15
0.07
0.08
0.25
0.13
0.90
0.02
0.01
0.44
0.69
0.19
372
0.10
0.46
0.33
0.39
0.71
0.12
0.08
0.01
0.91
0.52
0.11
0.34
0.19

0.44
54.9
0.07
1.29
3.07
0.25
0.22
0.06
0.04
0.09
0.14
0.13
0.18
0.43
0.23
0.94
0.01
0.01
0.38
1.36
0.23
298
0.11
0.33
0.74
0.48
0.84
0.10
0.05
0.02
0.86
0.42
0.27
0.24
0.17

0.43
54.8
0.07
1.33
3.09
0.22
0.18
0.07
0.09
0.17
0.14
0.10
0.22
0.58
0.14
0.95
0.01
0.01
0.32
1.24
0.22
310
0.10
0.38
0.65
0.54
0.81
0.09
0.12
0.05
0.89
0.46
0.28
0.24
0.17

0.52
54.8
0.05
1.24
3.27
0.30
0.15
0.05
0.07
0.07
0.19
0.08
0.10
0.27
0.17
0.94
0.01
0.01
0.42
0.74
0.19
364
0.09
0.51
0.30
0.37
0.74
0.11
0.07
0.01
0.90
0.49
0.13
0.34
0.18

Note: Based on the samples used for estimation. If not explicitly mentioned otherwise, variables are measured in 2002.

51 to 60

184

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table B1
Probit estimation results for the probability to be treated.
Treatment

Analysis of sickness absenteeism

Stratum

31–40

Women
Age
Foreigner
Earnings
Tenure in months
Part time employ.
No vocat. degree
University/polytech.
Voc. degree missing
Occ. in manufact.
Low skilled service occupation
Occ. in construction
Technical occupat.
Share UE last 10 y.
Share inactive . . .
Share employed. . .
Northern states
Central states
Jobs per inhabitant
Reg. GDP growth
Manufact. (sector)
Construction, trade
Age of establish.
No. of employees (ln)
Hiring difﬁculties
Sect. wage contract & many
absences
Work council
Firm with single establishment
Investment per
employee/10000
No use of subsidies
Work. time accounts
Share of terminations of
employment contracts due
to longer illness past 10 y.
<0.15
>0.2
Pseudo-R2 in %
No. of unique establishments

Health circles/courses

41–50

51–60

31–40

Coeff.

p-Val.

Coeff.

p-Val.

Coeff.

p-Val.

0.15
−0.01
0.17
0.18
−0.02
0.05
−0.08
−0.08
0.70
0.41
−0.15
−0.11
0.21
0.51
0.57
−0.36
−0.21
−0.29
0.0
−2.01
0.33
0.15
0.01
0.04
0.19
−0.45

0.0
25.8
0.1
0.0
18.3
28.8
5.9
14.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
1.7
0.0
0.8
25.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.4
0.0
0.0

0.22
0.01
0.03
0.16
−0.03
0.05
−0.22
−0.09
0.70
0.44
0.06
0.05
0.33
0.86
0.27
−0.16
−0.34
−0.37
0.0
−1.61
0.34
0.13
0.02
0.05
0.17
−0.50

0.0
62.4
57.9
0.0
1.8
16.5
0.0
5.7
0.0
0.0
18.6
28.7
0.0
0.0
65.6
12.6
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
3.7
0.0
0.0

0.22
0.01
−0.08
0.13
−0.03
0.02
−0.22
0.08
0.69
0.41
0.12
−0.01
0.17
0.42
0.69
0.03
−0.30
−0.40
0.0
−2.06
0.43
0.01
0.02
0.12
0.22
−0.57

0.0
78.5
18.9
0.3
21.4
60.5
0.0
18.7
0.0
0.0
3.2
81.1
0.0
23.2
43.9
84.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
86.7
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0

0.08
−0.01
0.02
0.21
0.03
0.04
−0.28
0.04
0.17
0.22
−0.13
−0.26
−0.16
–
–
−0.48
–
−0.20
00
−2.36
−0.46
−0.32
0.01
0.29
0.50
−0.37

3.0
17.1
80.9
0.0
16.0
30.3
0.0
45.9
2.4
0.1
1.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.13
−0.02
–
0.18
0.05
0.12
−0.28
0.01
0.16
0.19
0.03
−0.15
−0.15
–
–
—
–
−0.12
0.0
−2.41
−0.43
−0.36
–
0.43
0.59
−0.26

0.44
0.12
−0.02

0.0
0.0
5.6

0.42
0.24
0.01

0.0
0.0
75.7

0.53
0.13
−0.02

0.0
0.0
20.8

0.28
0.32
−0.42

0.0
0.0
46.9

–
0.34
−0.21

0.14
0.40
0.89

0.0
0.0
0.2

0.07
–
1.07

0.9

0.27
–
0.95

0.0

−0.02
0.70
0.75

0.0
0.0
2.0

−0.07
–
–

–
–

0.0

–
–
14.1
197

1.1

–
–
11.5
196

Coeff.

41–50
p-Val.

0.0

−0.45
−0.19

–
–
13.7
197

Coeff.

23.8
163

51–60
p-Val.
0.0
0.1

Coeff.

p-Val.
28.3
50.5
4.6
35.3
0.0
15.3
0.0
65.2
0.0
10.3
0.5
0.1
0.2

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.05
0.01
−0.15
−0.05
0.12
−0.07
−0.27
−0.04
0.30
0.13
0.17
−0.23
−0.19
–
–
−0.07
–
−0.21
0.0
−3.08
−0.22
−0.21
0.01
0.39
0.77
−0.34

1.8
0.0
0.0

0.45
0.39
−0.29

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.04
–
1.19

28.2

0.0
0.1
0.5
0.0
84.7
1.4
0.2
50.5
0.7
0.3

0.0
0.0
22.2
162

67.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.2

–
–
24.1
163

Note: – Variable omitted from particular speciﬁcation. All speciﬁcations include a constant term. Coefﬁcient estimates obtained by maximum likelihood. p-Values are based
on asymptotic distribution not accounting for clustering and given in %. The dependent variable equals 1 if observation is treated.

Fig. C.1. Cut-and-paste from the original. Translation: “Beyond what is required by law, which measures to protect and improve the health of your employees are you
implementing or supporting ﬁnancially? Please indicate in the following list which items are true for your establishment. (A) Analysis of sick leave. (B) Surveys of employees
about health risks in the workplace. (C) Discussion groups about health problems in the establishment (health circles). (D) Courses with information about healthy behaviour.
(E) Other, in particular:ﬁll in questionnaire. (F) None of the above”.

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

185

Table B2
Effects of analysing sickness absenteeism.
Age 31–40
ATET

Age 41–50
ATENT

ATE

ATET

Age 51–60
ATENT

ATE

ATET

ATENT

ATE

Cumulated months
employed

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.027
0.055
0.152
0.346
0.520
0.754
0.896
0.976
1.058

0.205
0.412
0.679
0.969
1.182
1.417
1.648
1.864
2.046

0.127
0.256
0.448
0.696
0.892
1.127
1.319
1.475
1.614

0.143
0.177
0.261
0.332
0.325
0.287
0.397
0.281
0.131

0.035
0.064
0.191
0.422
0.593
0.729
0.977
1.038
1.038

0.080
0.110
0.220
0.385
0.483
0.547
0.738
0.727
0.665

−0.064
−0.071
−0.201
−0.419
−0.700
−0.991
−1.185
−1.575
−2.009

0.149
0.507
0.957
1.540
2.051
2.464
2.846
3.239
3.628

0.061
0.268
0.479
0.731
0.915
1.037
1.181
1.251
1.299

Cumulated months in
early retirement

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.005
−0.019
−0.042
−0.060
−0.092

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.006
−0.017
−0.042
−0.064
−0.098

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.006
−0.018
−0.042
−0.063
−0.096

−0.005
−0.097
−0.188
−0.316
−0.494
−0.716
−0.991
−1.254
−1.500

−0.242
−0.543
−0.849
−1.072
−1.372
−1.822
−2.274
−2.731
−3.045

−0.144
−0.359
−0.576
−0.760
−1.009
−1.366
−1.744
−2.121
−2.407

Cumulated months
unemployed

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

−0.151
−0.256
−0.382
−0.508
−0.575
−0.651
−0.763
−0.819
−0.855

−0.151
−0.256
−0.382
−0.508
−0.575
−0.651
−0.763
−0.819
−0.855

−0.083
−0.113
−0.155
−0.220
−0.246
−0.321
−0.417
−0.460
−0.480

−0.148
−0.160
−0.241
−0.276
−0.327
−0.333
−0.464
−0.511
−0.517

−0.127
−0.124
−0.192
−0.251
−0.345
−0.368
−0.486
−0.543
−0.549

−0.136
−0.139
−0.212
−0.261
−0.337
−0.354
−0.477
−0.530
−0.535

−0.066
−0.170
−0.312
−0.326
−0.245
−0.209
−0.227
−0.256
−0.194

0.046
−0.026
−0.376
−0.716
−0.975
−1.081
−1.116
−1.110
−0.915

−0.001
−0.085
−0.350
−0.555
−0.674
−0.721
−0.749
−0.757
−0.618

Number of employer
changes

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

−0.002
0.002
0.000
−0.005
−0.034
−0.043
−0.061
−0.065
−0.058

0.000
0.003
0.005
0.004
−0.017
−0.028
−0.031
−0.022
−0.002

−0.001
0.002
0.002
−0.001
−0.026
−0.037
−0.048
−0.046
−0.033

0.000
−0.002
−0.003
0.004
−0.001
−0.034
−0.028
−0.022
−0.015

0.000
−0.004
−0.013
−0.008
−0.037
−0.053
−0.051
−0.051
−0.037

0.000
−0.003
−0.009
−0.003
−0.022
−0.045
−0.042
−0.040
−0.028

−0.001
0.001
−0.009
−0.005
−0.004
−0.013
−0.017
−0.012
−0.002

−0.002
−0.001
−0.013
−0.014
−0.017
−0.023
−0.026
−0.010
−0.001

−0.001
0.000
−0.012
−0.010
−0.011
−0.019
−0.022
−0.011
−0.001

Tenure

2/2008

85.3

79.9

82.9

39.7

48.4

86.7

54.4

* ** ***

, ,

6.8

8.6

Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

Table B3
Effects of health circles/courses.
Age 31–40
ATET

Age 41–50
ATENT

ATE

ATET

Age 51–60
ATENT

ATE

ATET

ATENT

ATE

Cumulated months
employed

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.091
0.145
0.226
0.300
0.251
0.169
0.296
0.157
0.057

0.199
0.379
0.734
10.160
1.532
1.827
2.120
2.409
2.624

0.159
0.292
0.545
0.840
1.055
1.210
1.442
1.571
1.669

0.093
−0.033
−0.125
−0.226
−0.392
−0.550
−0.670
−0.781
−0.848

0.184
0.343
0.455
0.519
0.591
0.763
1.016
1.286
1.540

0.151
0.208
0.248
0.252
0.239
0.293
0.413
0.546
0.686

0.690
1.243
1.683
2.184
2.698
3.046
3.347
3.471
3.746

0.425
0.909
1.497*
2.484**
3.528**
4.313**
5.097**
5.692**
6.296**

0.517
1.026
1.562
2.379*
3.238**
3.870**
4.486**
4.916**
5.405*

Cumulated months in
early retirement

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.009
0.006
0.011
0.029

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.002
0.008
0.020
0.028
0.040

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.001
0.009
0.015
0.022
0.036

−0.363
−0.788
−1.085
−1.150
−1.095
−0.971
−0.746
−0.435
−0.078

−0.452
−0.985**
−1.482**
−1.620
−1.655
−1.589
−1.377
−1.216
−1.002

−0.421
−0.916**
−1.344**
−1.456
−1.459
−1.373
−1.157
−0.943
−0.679

186

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table B3 (Continued)
Age 31–40

Age 41–50

Age 51–60

ATET

ATENT

Cumulated months
unemployed

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

−0.094
−0.141
−0.170
−0.135
−0.083
−0.047
−0.063
−0.012
−0.011

−0.139
−0.194
−0.313
−0.446
−0.567
−0.638
−0.737
−0.845
−0.815

−0.122
−0.174
−0.259
−0.330
−0.387
−0.418
−0.486
−0.535
−0.516

−0.027
0.066
0.180
0.271
0.368
0.444
0.543
0.627
0.715

−0.139
−0.215
−0.208
−0.182
−0.277
−0.492
−0.758
−1.015
−1.181

−0.099
−0.114
−0.070
−0.020
−0.046
−0.157
−0.293
−0.427
−0.503

−0.431
−0.932
−1.253
−1.534
−1.756
−1.661
−1.581
−1.426
−1.310

−0.334
−0.755
−1.299*
−1.983**
−2.560**
−3.040**
−3.427**
−3.709**
−3.701**

−0.368*
−0.817*
−1.283**
−1.826**
−2.279**
−2.558**
−2.782**
−2.912**
−2.866**

Number of employer
changes

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

−0.002
−0.004
−0.020
−0.019
−0.039
−0.047
−0.056
−0.065
−0.088

−0.002
−0.005
−0.017
−0.023
−0.062
−0.084*
−0.103**
−0.113
−0.084

−0.002
−0.005
−0.018
−0.022
−0.053
−0.070*
−0.086*
−0.095
−0.086

0.001
−0.001
−0.005
−0.001
0.005
0.010
0.013
0.010
0.014

0.000
−0.005**
−0.018
−0.026*
−0.061*
−0.076*
−0.092*
−0.098*
−0.099*

0.000
−0.003
−0.014
−0.017
−0.037
−0.045*
−0.054
−0.059
−0.059

−0.001
−0.007
−0.020
−0.018
−0.007
−0.007
−0.014
−0.013
−0.009

0.001
−0.002
−0.021**
−0.028***
−0.032*
−0.038*
−0.049***
−0.058***
−0.053**

0.000
−0.004
−0.021
−0.025
−0.023
−0.027
−0.037*
−0.042**
−0.037*

Tenure

2/2008

* ** ***

, ,

165.6

20.1***

ATE

187.3**

ATET

2.5

ATENT

156.7**

ATE

108.0*

ATET

76.4

ATENT

184.6***

ATE

146.8**

Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

Table B4
Effects of analysing sickness absenteeism on the probability to be in a certain labour market state in percentage points.
Age 31–40
ATET

Age 41–50
ATET

ATENT

ATE

ATET

Employed end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.004
0.004
0.007
0.014
0.018
0.013
0.003
0.010
−0.001

0.016
0.020
0.021
0.021
0.019
0.018
0.017
0.015
0.012

0.011
0.013
0.015
0.018
0.018
0.016
0.011
0.013
0.006

0.007
0.010
0.001
−0.001
−0.003
0.003
0.003
−0.010
−0.011

−0.010
0.013
0.017
0.022
0.004
0.018
0.016
0.000
0.000

−0.003
0.011
0.011
0.013
0.001
0.012
0.011
−0.005
−0.005

−0.006
0.003
−0.013
−0.025
−0.025
−0.018
−0.024
−0.034
−0.029

0.019
0.031
0.039
0.033
0.043
0.035
0.030
0.035
0.031

In early retirement
scheme end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.009
0.002
−0.002
0.004
0.001
0.004
0.003
0.006
0.004

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.002
−0.001
−0.002
−0.002
−0.005

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
−0.001
−0.002
−0.002
−0.004*

−0.013
−0.016
−0.018
−0.026
−0.025
−0.021
−0.021
−0.015
−0.013

−0.023
−0.026
−0.025
−0.021
−0.028
−0.041
−0.036
−0.039
−0.027

−0.016
−0.018
−0.018
−0.017
−0.022
−0.033*
−0.029
−0.031*
−0.025

Unemployed end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.000
0.007
0.002
0.004
−0.001
−0.006
−0.003
−0.003
0.001

−0.010
−0.008
−0.013
−0.006
−0.005
−0.011*
−0.003
−0.004
−0.002

−0.006
−0.001
−0.006
−0.002
−0.004
−0.009
−0.003
−0.004
−0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.001
−0.002
−0.002
−0.004

−0.001
−0.003
−0.011
−0.012
0.003
−0.007
−0.003
−0.004
0.012

−0.004
−0.004
−0.008
−0.007
0.001
−0.004
−0.007
−0.004
0.007

−0.006
−0.006
−0.008
−0.012
−0.013
−0.022
−0.019
−0.020
−0.021

0.002
−0.017
−0.035*
−0.018
−0.023
−0.006
0.001
0.010
0.001

−0.001
−0.016
−0.026*
−0.007
−0.011
−0.003
0.000
0.004
0.002

On unemployment
insurance end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

−0.001
0.001
0.001
0.000
0.004
−0.006
−0.007
−0.005
0.002

−0.007
−0.008**
−0.004
−0.005
−0.001
−0.008***
−0.003
−0.004
0.000

−0.004
−0.004
−0.002
−0.003
0.002
−0.007**
−0.005
−0.005
0.001

−0.009
−0.006
−0.003
0.000
−0.002
0.000
−0.011
−0.004
0.000

0.004
−0.004
−0.011
−0.008
0.008
−0.005
−0.002
−0.006
0.010

0.000
−0.006
−0.008
−0.004
0.004
−0.002
−0.009
−0.007
0.006

−0.005
−0.014
−0.014
0.009
0.008
0.002
−0.003
−0.003
0.003

0.004
−0.013
−0.027
−0.015
−0.016
−0.001
0.005
−0.006
0.002

0.000
−0.013
−0.021
−0.005
−0.006
0.002
0.002
−0.004
0.001

* ** ***

, ,

ATENT

ATE

Age 51–60
ATENT

Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

ATE
0.009
0.020
0.018
0.009
0.015
0.013
0.008
0.006
0.006

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

187

Table B5
Effects of health circles/courses on the probability to be in a certain labour market state in percentage points.
Age 31–40
ATET
Employed end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.008
0.008
0.006
0.003
0.005
−0.012
0.012
−0.008
−0.006

In early retirement
scheme end of

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

Unemployed end of

On unemployment
insurance end of

* ** ***

, ,

Age 41–50
ATENT

ATE

Age 51–60

ATET

ATENT

ATE

ATET

ATENT
0.037
0.037
0.058*
0.084***
0.079**
0.069**
0.064**
0.049*
0.055*

ATE
0.044*
0.039*
0.051**
0.071**
0.064*
0.055*
0.048*
0.037
0.046

0.019
0.019
0.029
0.027
0.034*
0.014
0.024
0.014
0.014

0.015
0.015
0.021
0.018
0.023
0.004
0.019
0.006
0.006

0.005
−0.010
−0.001
−0.015
−0.009
−0.011
−0.008
−0.008
−0.003

0.011
0.005
0.002
−0.003
0.013
0.013
0.019
0.019
0.023

0.009
−0.001
0.001
−0.008
0.005
0.004
0.009
0.010
0.014

0.058
0.044
0.038
0.047
0.036
.029
0.019
0.014
0.031

0.011
0.013
0.011
0.009
0.017
0.015
0.016
0.009
0.014

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.010
0.004
0.004
0.010
0.010
0.005
0.008
0.014
0.012

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.007
0.005
0.003
0.002
0.004

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.005
0.003
0.002
0.001
0.003

0.012
0.005
0.008
0.009
0.011
0.002
−0.004
−0.004
0.000

−0.035
−0.044*
−0.036
−0.005
0.006
0.015
0.026
0.019
0.021

−0.034
−0.037*
−0.030
0.000
0.007
0.013
0.025
0.022
0.024

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

−0.011
−0.003
−0.014
−0.005
−0.013
−0.002
−0.007
0.005
0.007

−0.010
−0.003
−0.011
−0.002
−0.008
0.000
−0.013
0.003
0.004

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
−0.001
0.001
0.002

−0.015
0.007
0.001
0.003
−0.005
−0.015*
−0.015*
−0.011
−0.009

−0.010
0.009
0.003
0.005
0.000
−0.007
−0.007
−0.005
−0.004

−0.033
−0.023
−0.019
0.009
0.010
0.010
0.023
0.028
0.029

−0.024
−0.036*
−0.058**
−0.052**
−0.040*
−0.038*
−0.013
−0.008
0.019

−0.026
−0.033*
−0.047***
−0.039**
−0.024
−0.022
−0.006
−0.001
0.015

2/2004
1/2005
2/2005
1/2006
2/2006
1/2007
2/2007
1/2008
2/2008

−0.008
−0.002
−0.006
0.003
0.000
0.002
−0.023
0.000
−0.002

−0.005
0.003
−0.003
−0.006
−0.007*
−0.001
−0.009
0.002
0.007

−0.005
0.002
−0.003
−0.004
−0.004
−0.001
−0.024
0.001
0.003

−0.001
0.012
0.006
0.008
0.008
0.007
0.008
0.007
0.006

−0.008
0.011
0.001
0.007
−0.005
−0.013**
−0.017**
−0.012*
−0.005

−0.005
0.012
0.003
0.006
−0.002
−0.008*
−0.010**
−0.008*
−0.003

−0.030
−0.028
−0.026
−0.015
0.005
0.006
0.008
0.012
0.008

−0.031*
−0.029
−0.048**
−0.047**
−0.037**
−0.037**
−0.019
−0.018
0.005

−0.030*
−0.026
−0.039**
−0.036**
−0.022
−0.023
−0.010
−0.008
0.004

Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

Table D1
Analysis of sickness absenteeism.
Age 31–40

Age 41–50

Age 51–60

ATENT

ATET

ATE

ATENT

ATET

ATE

ATENT

ATET

ATE

Individual characteristics
Women
Age
Foreigner
Earnings
Tenure in months
Part time employ.
No vocat. degree
University/polytech.
Voc. degree missing
Occ. in manufact.
Low skilled service occupation
Occ. in construction
Technical occupat.
Share unemployed last 10 years
Share inactive . . .
Share employed . . .

−0.032
0.139
0.004
−0.070
−0.002
−0.019
0.100
−0.019
0.014
−0.005
0.110
0.004
−0.037
0.001
−0.001
0.000

0.002
0.002
−0.029
−0.056
0.078
0.014
−0.003
−0.003
−0.009
0.026
−0.007
0.027
−0.027
−0.006
0.000
0.000

−0.017
0.079
−0.010
−0.064*
0.033
−0.004
0.055
−0.012
0.004
0.009
0.059
0.014
−0.032
−0.002
−0.001
0.000

−0.020
−0.169
0.011
−0.017
−0.005
−0.016
0.086
−0.001
0.009
0.007
0.028
−0.004
−0.025
0.000
0.000
0.000

−0.013
−0.180
−0.018
−0.021
0.016
0.012
0.024
0.006
−0.025
0.003
−0.001
0.012
−0.015
−0.010
0.000
0.000

−0.017
−0.173
−0.001
−0.019
0.003
−0.004
0.060*
0.002
−0.005
0.006
0.016
0.002
−0.021
−0.004
0.000
0.000

−0.007
−0.048
0.074
−0.092*
0.013
−0.014
0.099*
−0.021*
−0.002
0.018
0.051
0.046
−0.042
0.001
0.000
0.000

−0.022
−0.084
−0.003
0.010
−0.022
0.017
0.026
0.002
−0.054
0.014
−0.020
−0.009
0.027
0.001
0.001
0.000

−0.013
−0.063
0.042
−0.050
−0.002
−0.001
0.069**
−0.011
−0.023
0.016
0.022
0.023
−0.013
0.001
0.000
0.000

Firm characteristics
Northern states
Central states
Reg. GDP growth
Manufact. (sector)
Construction, trade
Age of establish.

0.000
−0.031
−0.014
−0.025
−0.042
−0.834

0.000
−0.045
0.007
0.002
0.004
0.881

0.000
−0.037
−0.005
−0.013
−0.022
−0.084

0.000
0.010
−0.016
0.009
−0.001
−0.552

0.000
−0.022
0.007
0.027
−0.035
0.290

0.000
−0.003
−0.007
0.017
−0.015
−0.206

0.000
−0.007
0.005
0.031
−0.052
−0.912

0.000
−0.011
0.009
0.061
−0.031
0.355

0.000
−0.008
0.007
0.044
−0.043
−0.389

188

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189

Table D1 (Continued)
Age 31–40

No. of employees (ln)
Hiring difﬁculties
Sect. wage contract & many absences
Work council
Firm with single establishment
Investment per employee/10,000
No use of subsidies
Working time accounts
Has ﬁrm wage contract
No wage contract but follows sectorial wage contract
No wage contract
Headquarter of ﬁrm
Branch of ﬁrm
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 2 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 4 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 6 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 8 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 10 y.
* ** ***

, ,

Age 41–50

Age 51–60

ATENT

ATET

ATE

ATENT

ATET

ATE

ATENT

ATET

ATE

0.000
−0.012
0.930
0.052
−0.015
0.178
0.057
−0.017
−0.026
0.005
0.019
−0.045
0.095
−0.003
−0.005
−0.004
−0.001
0.004

0.000
−0.025
0.784
0.010
0.093
−0.533
0.012
−0.025
−0.068
0.029
0.031
−0.067
−0.033
−0.002
−0.003
−0.002
0.001
0.003

0.000
−0.018
0.866
0.034
0.032
−0.133
0.038
−0.020
−0.045
0.016
0.024
−0.054
0.039
−0.003
−0.004
−0.003
0.000
0.004

0.000
0.003
0.940
−0.009
−0.005
−0.006
0.060

0.000
0.000
0.806
0.025
0.091
−0.145
−0.008

0.000
0.002
0.885
0.005
0.034
−0.063
0.032

0.000
0.024
0.940
−0.011
0.105
−0.022
0.033

0.000
0.023
0.831
0.037
0.039
−0.100
−0.017

0.000
0.024
0.895
0.009
0.078
−0.054
0.012

−0.032
0.027
0.012
0.017
0.037
0.002
−0.002
0.001
0.002
0.006

−0.063
0.041
0.022
−0.062
−0.003
−0.001
−0.003
−0.003
−0.001
0.001

−0.045
0.033
0.016
−0.015
0.020
0.001
−0.003
−0.001
0.001
0.004

−0.029
0.009
0.026
−0.046
−0.008
0.003
0.001
0.005
0.004
0.008

−0.054
0.041
0.013
−0.013
−0.001
−0.005
−0.008
−0.010
−0.009
−0.008

−0.039
0.022
0.020
−0.032
−0.005
0.000
−0.003
−0.001
−0.001
0.002

Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

Table D2
Health circles/courses.
Age 31–40

Age 41–50

Age 51–60

ATENT

ATET

ATE

ATENT

Individual characteristics
Women
Age
Foreigner
Earnings
Tenure in months
Part time employ.
No vocat. Degree
University/polytech.
Voc. Degree missing
Occ. In manufact.
Low skilled service occupation
Occ. In construction
Technical occupat.
Share unemployed last 10 years

0.017
0.140
0.005
−0.045
0.045
0.021
0.198*
−0.018
−0.013
0.005
0.077
0.053
−0.049
0.000

−0.018
−0.108
0.010
−0.183
0.137
0.037
−0.001
−0.148
0.028
−0.005
−0.012
0.019
0.010
0.000

0.004
0.048
0.007
−0.096*
0.079
0.027
0.124*
−0.066
0.002
0.001
0.044
0.040
−0.027
0.000

−0.077* −0.003
0.240
0.316

Firm characteristics
Central states
Reg. GDP growth
Manufact. (sector)
Construction, trade
Age of establish.
No. of employees (ln)
Hiring difﬁculties
Sect. wage contract & many absences
Work council
Firm with single establishment
Investment per employee/10,000
No use of subsidies
Working time accounts
Has ﬁrm wage contract
No wage contract but follows sectorial wage contract
No wage contract
Headquarter of ﬁrm
Branch of ﬁrm
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 2 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 4 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 6 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 8 y.
Share of terminations of employment contracts due to longer illness past 10 y.

0.000
−0.010
−0.017
−0.058
−0.100
0.000
0.033
0.937
0.085**
−0.012
−0.057
−0.030
−0.063
−0.022
0.050
−0.011
−0.004
0.035
−0.006
−0.007
−0.004
0.001
0.006

0.000
0.015
0.007
0.017
0.328
0.000
−0.016
0.920
−0.027
0.036
0.045
−0.016
0.121
−0.062
0.065
−0.004
−0.012
−0.036
−0.007
−0.009
−0.009
−0.003
0.001

0.000
−0.001
−0.008
−0.030
0.059
0.000
0.015
0.931
0.044*
0.006
−0.019
−0.025
0.006
−0.037
0.056
−0.008
−0.007
0.009
−0.007
−0.008
−0.006
−0.001
0.004

0.000
−0.009
−0.013
−0.096

0.000
0.006
0.011
0.036

0.000
−0.004
−0.004
−0.048

0.000
−0.019
0.951
0.093**
−0.051
0.014
−0.071

0.000
0.007
0.841
0.083
0.178
0.038
0.092

* ** ***

, ,

0.040
−0.128
−0.031
0.139*
−0.017
−0.013
0.019
0.020
0.028
−0.001

0.001
0.018
0.010
0.035
−0.001
−0.007
−0.007
−0.008
−0.002
−0.002

ATET

−0.080
0.051
0.017
0.005
−0.016
0.022
−0.003
−0.033
0.011
0.014

0.079
−0.075
−0.004
−0.060
0.033
−0.006
−0.011
−0.010
−0.006
−0.002

ATE

ATENT

ATET

ATE

−0.051
0.267

−0.031
−0.265
0.001
0.007
−0.044
0.015
0.092
−0.005
−0.006
0.004
0.015
0.041
0.017
0.000

0.025
−0.078
0.005
0.023
0.089
0.043
0.034
0.004
−0.002
−0.031
−0.162
0.016
0.024
0.000

−0.011
−0.200
0.003
0.013
0.003
0.025
0.072*
−0.002
−0.004
−0.008
−0.046
0.032
0.019
0.000

0.000
−0.010
0.912
0.090**
0.031
0.022
−0.012

0.000
0.011
−0.026
−0.059
−0.174
0.000
0.036
0.955
0.021
−0.038
0.017
0.009

0.000
−0.001
−0.042
0.064
0.374
0.000
0.049
0.870
−0.014
0.136
0.020
−0.053

0.000
0.007
−0.031
−0.016
0.018
0.000
0.040
0.926
0.009
0.023
0.018
−0.012

0.029
−0.015
0.005
0.001
0.011
−0.007*
−0.009*
−0.009
−0.004
−0.002

−0.034
0.048
0.008
0.038
−0.031
−0.008*
−0.009
−0.005
0.000
0.005

−0.035
0.029
0.005
−0.048
0.028
−0.010
−0.014
−0.013
−0.008
−0.003

−0.035
0.042
0.007
0.008
−0.010
−0.008**
−0.011*
−0.008
−0.003
0.002

−0.003
−0.064
−0.014
0.091*
−0.016
0.000
0.011
0.001
0.022
0.005

Indicates signiﬁcance on the 10/5/1% level. Inference is based on block bootstrapping p-values (clustered at the establishment level, 499 replications).

References
Abadie, A., Imbens, G.W., 2006. Large sample properties of matching estimators for
average treatment effects. Econometrica 74, 235–267.
Abadie, A., Imbens, G.W., 2008. On the failure of the bootstrap for matching estimators. Econometrica 76, 1537–1557.

Biewen, M., Fitzenberger, B., Osikominu, R., Paul, M., 2014. The effectiveness of public sponsored training revisited: the importance of data and methodological
choices. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4), 837–897.
BMAS, 2014. Sicherheit und Gesundheit bei der Arbeit 2012. In: Unfallverhütungsbericht Arbeit. Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales (BMAS),
Dortmund/Berlin/Dresden.

M. Huber et al. / Journal of Health Economics 43 (2015) 170–189
Böckerman, P., Ilmakunnas, P., 2009. Unemployment and self-assessed health: evidence from panel data. Health Economics 18, 161–179.
Dehejia, R.H., Wahba, S., 2002. Propensity-score-matching methods for nonexperimental causal studies. Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 151–161.
European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2009. Case Study: Health
Circles—An Effective and Enjoyable Way to Conduct Risk Assessment, Accessed
via https://osha.europa.eu/data/case-studies/health-circles-an-effective-andenjoyable-way-to-conduct-risk-assessment/ on Nov 14th 2014.
Fielding, J.E., Piserchia, P.V., 1989. Frequency of worksite health promotion activities.
American Journal of Public Health 79, 16–20.
Friczewski, F., 1996. Gesundheit und Motivation der Mitarbeiter als Produkt
betrieblicher Organisation: Ein systematischer Ansatz. In: WZB Discussion Paper
96-211.
Hollederer, A., 2007. Betriebliche Gesundheitsförderung in Deutschland—
Ergebnisse des IAB-Betriebspanels 2002 und 2004. Gesundheitswesen 69,
63–76.
Huber, M., Lechner, M., Wunsch, C., 2011. Does leaving welfare improve health?
Evidence for Germany. Health Economics 20, 484–504.
Huber, M., Lechner, M., Wunsch, C., 2013. The performance of estimators based on
the propensity score. Journal of Econometrics 175, 1–21.
IGA, 2009. Health in the Workplace—A Guide to Health at Work. Initiative
Gesundheit und Arbeit (IGA), BKK Bundesverband, Deutsche Gesetzliche
Unfallversicherung, BGAG–Institut Arbeit und Gesundheit der DGUV, AOKBundesverband, Verband der Ersatzkassen e.V.
Joffe, M.M., Have, T.R., Feldman, H.I., Kimmel, S., 2004. Model selection, confounder control, and marginal structural models. The American Statistician
58–4, 272–279.
Jung, J., Nitzsche, A., Ansmann, L., Ernstmann, N., Ommen, O., Stieler-Lorenz, B.,
Wasem, J., Pfaff, H., 2012. Organizational factors and the attitude toward
health promotion in German ICT-companies. Health Promotion International
27, 382–393.
Kenkel, D., Supina, D., 1992. The determinants of worksite health promotion. Economics Letters 40, 345–351.
Kreis, J., Bödeker, W., 2004. Health-related and economic beneﬁts of workplace
health promotion and prevention—summary of the scientiﬁc evidence. In: IGA
Report 3e. The BKK Federation and the Federation of Institutions for Statutory
Accident Insurance and Prevention.

189

Köhler, T., Janssen, C., Plath, C.S., Steinhausen, S., Pfaff, H., 2009. Determinanten der
betrieblichen Gesundheitsförderung in der Versicherungsbranche: Ergebnisse
einer Vollerhebung bei deutschen Versicherungen im Jahr 2006. Gesundheitswesen 71, 722–731.
Lechner, M., 2002. Some practical issues in the evaluation of heterogeneous labour
market programmes by matching methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A: Statistics in Society 165, 59–82.
Lechner, M., Wunsch, C., 2013. Sensitivity of matching-based program evaluations to the availability of control variables. Labour Economics 21,
111–121.
Lechner, M., Miquel, R., Wunsch, C., 2011. Long-run effects of public sector sponsored
training in West Germany. Journal of the European Economic Association 9,
742–784.
MacKinnon, J.G., 2006. Bootstrap methods in econometrics. The Economic Record
82, 2–18.
New York Times, 2013. As OSHA Emphasizes Safety, Long-Term Health Risks Fester, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/31/us/osha-emphasizes-safety-healthrisks-fester.html (accessed August, 26, 2013) (online edition).
Rosenbaum, P.R., Rubin, D.B., 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70, 41–50.
Rubin, D.B., 1979. Using multivariate matched sampling and regression adjustment
to control bias in observational studies. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 318–328.
Sockoll, I., Kramer, I., Bödeker, W., 2009. Effectiveness and economic beneﬁts of
workplace health promotion and prevention—summary of the scientiﬁc evidence 2000 to 2006. In: IGA Report 13e. Published by the Federal Association of
Company Health Insurance Funds.
Ulmer, J., Gröben, F., 2005. Work place health promotion. A longitudinal study
in companies placed in Hessen and Thueringen. Journal of Public Health 13,
144–152.
Wunsch, C., 2013. Optimal use of labor market policies: the role of job search assistance. Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 1030–1045.
Wunsch, C., Lechner, M., 2008. What did all the money do? On the general ineffectiveness of recent West German labour market programmes. Kyklos 61,
134–174.

