Journal

of Econometrics

58 (1993) 1-2. North-Holland

Editors’ introduction
Nonparametric

and semiparametric

to discrete response
Wolfgang

approaches

analysis

Htirdle

Humboldt-Universiriil zu Berlin, D-1020 Berlin, Germany

Charles

F. Manski

University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA

A decade ago, the econometric
analysis of discrete response seemed a mature
field of inquiry. The exciting discoveries of the 1970s had given way to the writing
of research syntheses, by Amemiya (1981), Manski and McFadden
(1981), and
Maddala (1983). Major breakthroughs
did not appear to be on the horizon.
In the early 1980s econometric analysis of discrete response essentially meant
maximum likelihood estimation
of parametric models. Nonparametric
regression analysis, developed by statisticians
in the 1960s and 1970s had not yet
diffused into econometrics.
Semiparametric
estimators had appeared, namely
maximum score and distribution-free
maximum likelihood. But these methods
stood apart from the rest of the literature and were not well understood.
The
research syntheses written at the time mentioned
them only in passing.
Intensive development
of nonparametric
and semiparametric
approaches to
discrete response analysis began in the middle 1980s and continues today, as yet
with no sign of letup. The eleven papers in this issue of the Annuls of Econometrics indicate well the vitality of the field. These papers report important new
findings on matters ranging from identification
to asymptotic sampling distributions to performance
in practice.
Four papers are concerned
with the estimation
of structural
models of
discrete choice. Matzkin analyses the identifiability
of some nonparametric

Correspondence to: Charles F. Manski, Department
Observatory
Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

0304~4076/93/%06.00

0

1993-Elsevier

of Economics,

Science Publishers

University

of Wisconsin,

B.V. All rights reserved

1180

2

W. Hiirdle and C.F. Manski. Editors’ introduction

polychotomous choice models. Thompson provides lower bounds on the
asymptotic variance of estimators of several semiparametric models. Horowitz
offers an empirical case study comparing various semiparametric estimates of
a classic transportation choice model. Pinske compares several algorithms for
the computation of certain semiparametric estimates.
Four papers study the estimation of semiparametric index models, whose
applications include but are not restricted to discrete response. Hardle and
Tsybakov continue their research on average-derivative estimators for singleindex models; the article uses second-order expansions to characterize the
sensitivity of the estimates to bandwidth selection. Ichimura introduces his
semiparametric least squares estimator for single-index models and develops its
asymptotic properties. Ahn and Powell develop an estimator for a class of
semiparametric selection models that satisfy an index property. Newey and
Powell provide efficiency bounds for estimates of these semiparametric selection
models.
The remaining three articles, like many of those mentioned already, employ
nonparametric regression theory. Campos and Cao-Abad develop bootstrap
confidence intervals for kernel estimates of binary regressions. Manski, applying
nonparametric regression to economic theory, characterizes the situations in
which a decision maker facing a dynamic discrete choice problem under uncertainty can estimate nonparametrically the expected utility of an action by
observing the outcomes experienced by others. Sepanski and Carroll use nonparametric regression methods to estimate semiparametric regression models
when the regressors are measured with error but an auxiliary validation sample
is available.
This issue grew out of the participation of many of the authors in a workshop
on discrete choice models hosted by C.O.R.E. in November 1990. The workshop
brought together a group of econometricians and statisticians for a highly
productive week of seminars and discussions. We are grateful to C.O.R.E. for its
assistance.

References
Amemiya, T., 1981, Qualitative
response models: A survey, Journal of Economic Literature
19,
1483-1536.
Maddala,
G., 1983, Limited-dependent
and qualitative
variables in econometrics
(Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge).
Manski, C. and D. McFadden,
1981, Structural analysis of discrete data with econometric applications (MIT. Press, Cambridge,
MA).

