Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 5: 293–295, 2012
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1934-5747 print / 1934-5739 online
DOI: 10.1080/19345747.2012.688460

Comments: Improving Weighting Methods for Causal
Mediation Analysis
Kosuke Imai

Downloaded by [Princeton University] at 16:43 12 July 2012

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA

I begin this discussion by thanking Larry Hedges, the editor of the journal, for giving me
an opportunity to provide a commentary on this stimulating article. I also would like to
congratulate the authors of the article for their insightful discussion on causal mediation
analysis, which is one of the most important and challenging methodological problems
we face in the literature of causal inference. I particularly admire the authors’ efforts to
clearly explain complex statistical concepts in the context of their specific application. I
have no doubt that applied education researchers who read this article will gain a better
understanding of important methodological issues regarding causal mediation analysis.
Although there are many positive things to be said about the authors’ proposed methodology, in this commentary I discuss one potential way to further improve it. In particular,
the authors argue that the proposed ratio-of-mediator-probability weighted (RMPW) estimation methodology is attractive because unlike some of the existing methods it “does not
involve explicit modeling of the mediator-outcome relationship” (p. 273). Although this is
clearly an advantage, the RMPW estimation methodology still requires researchers to correctly model the mediator given the treatment and pretreatment confounders. This is often
a challenging task because there may exist a large number of pretreatment confounders.
Because nonparametric modeling in a high-dimensional covariate space is difficult, these
confounders often must be adjusted through a parametric model.
A similar problem applies to propensity score methods. For example, Kang and Schafer
(2007) showed that slight misspecification of propensity score model can yield a large bias
in the estimation of treatment effects. They found that the magnitude of such bias can
be quite substantial for propensity score weighting methods when the severe selection
bias leads to small weights. Imai King and Stuart (2008) called this problem “propensity
score tautology”—propensity score methods allow researchers to avoid the modeling of the
outcome-treatment relationship only when they can correctly model the treatment-covariate
relationship. The proposed RMPW estimation methodology resembles propensity score
weighting methods in that researchers must confront the equally difficult task of correctly
modeling the conditional distribution of mediator given the treatment and pretreatment
confounders.
To address this issue, Imai and Ratkovic (2012) proposed the covariate balancing
propensity score (CBPS) estimation as the robust parametric estimation strategy for the
propensity score. The idea is to exploit the dual characteristics of the propensity score as
the conditional probability of treatment assignment and a balancing score: If the propensity
score is correctly estimated, it should predict the treatment assignment Z and balance the
covariate distribution between the treatment and control groups (once the covariates X
Address correspondence to Kosuke Imai, Department of Politics, Princeton University, Princeton
NJ 08544, USA. E-mail: kimai@princeton.edu

294

K. Imai

are appropriately weighted via the inverse of the propensity score). Specifically, Imai and
Ratkovic proposed to use the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimation with the
following overidentifying moment conditions,


Downloaded by [Princeton University] at 16:43 12 July 2012

E


Zπθ (X) (1 − Z)πθ (X)
−
=0
πθ (X)
1 − πθ (X)
 

ZX
(1 − Z)X
E
−
=0
πθ (X) 1 − πθ (X)

(1)
(2)

 is a vector-valued function of X selected by the researcher, πθ (X) = Prθ (Z = 1 |
where X
X) is the propensity score with a vector of unknown parameters θ , and πθ (X) = ∂θ∂ πθ (X)
is its first derivative with respect to θ . Equation 1 represents the score function derived
from the likelihood function, corresponding to the fact that the propensity score is defined
as the conditional probability of treatment assignment. The moment condition given in
Equation 2, on the other hand, represents the covariate balancing condition where some
functions of X are balanced in expectation. Thus, what the CBPS estimation accomplishes
is to estimate the propensity score such that the covariate balance is optimized. Imai
and Ratkovic (2012) found that the resulting CBPS dramatically improves the empirical
performance of propensity score weighting methods and overcomes the critiques of Kang
and Schafer (2007).
I conjecture that the CBPS estimation can improve the performance of the proposed
RMPW estimation methodology. As discussed in Imai and Ratkovic (2012), the CBPS can
be easily extended to nonbinary treatment regimes, which implies that it can be applied to
the RMPW estimation even when the mediator is not binary. In particular, instead of fitting
the ordered logistic regression via maximum likelihood as suggested by the authors, we
can use the GMM estimation based on the following moment conditions. First, we have a
set of moment conditions representing the score function from the likelihood,


3

1{C = c} ∂πθc (V )
·
E
πθc (V )
∂θ 
c=0


=0

(3)

where πθc (V ) = Prθ (C = c | V ) is the propensity score for the mediator level c ∈
{0, 1, 2, 3}, V = (Z, X, X, W (1), W (0)), and θ = (β1 , β2 , β3 , β4 , d1 , d2 , d3 , τ ). Second,
we have the set of covariate balancing moment conditions,


1{C = c}V
1{C = c − 1}V
−
E
πθc (V )
πθc−1 (V )


=0

(4)

for c = 1, 2, 3. Thus, without modifying the model used for the conditional distribution of
the mediator, the CBPS estimation provides a robust way of estimating the weights for the
proposed RMPW methodology.
Finally, although the improvement of the estimation techniques such as the one described above is possible, I emphasize that like the existing methodologies, the RMPW
estimation methodology relies upon strong identification assumptions that are not directly
testable from the observed data. In particular, these methods require that there exist no
posttreatment confounders, whether observed or unobserved, for the relationship between
the mediator and the outcome. This is a strong assumption because in many cases there

Improving Weighting Methods

295

Downloaded by [Princeton University] at 16:43 12 July 2012

are multiple mediators that are causally related to each other. In my opinion, there are two
ways to address this important methodological problem. First, one can conduct sensitivity
analyses within a certain modeling framework. For example, Imai and Yamamoto (2011)
developed a sensitivity analysis using a semiparametric random coefficient linear regression
model. Similarly, Tchetgen Tchetgen and Shpitser (2011) proposed a sensitivity analysis
under a different semiparametric model. Second, researchers can utilize alternative research
designs so that strong assumptions can be relaxed. Imai, Tingley, and Yamamoto (2012)
and Mattei and Mealli (2011) developed several such experimental designs. These recent
developments are important because they directly address the limitations of the standard
causal mediation analysis. Therefore, I conclude this discussion by encouraging the authors
and others to make future methodological contributions to these promising new research
agendas about causal mediation analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author acknowledges final support by the National Science Foundation (SES–0918968).

REFERENCES
Imai, K., King, G., & Stuart, E.A. (2008). Misunderstandings among experimentalists and observationalists about causal inference. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in
Society), 171, 481–502.
Imai, K., & Ratkovic, M. (2012). Covariate balancing propensity score (Working paper). Available
at from http://imai.princeton.edu/research/CBPS.html
Imai, K., Tingley, D., & Yamamoto, T. (2012). Experimental designs for identifying causal mechanisms (with discussions). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in Society).
Forthcoming.
Imai, K., & Yamamoto, T. (2011). Identification and sensitivity analysis for multiple causal
mechanisms: Revisiting evidence from framing experiments (Working paper). Available from
http://imai.princeton.edu/research/medsens.html
Kang, J. D., & Schafer, J. L. (2007). Demystifying double robustness: A comparison of alternative
strategies for estimating a population mean from incomplete data (with discussions). Statistical
Science, 22, 523–539.
Mattei, A., & Mealli, F. (2011). Augmented designs to assess principal strata direct effects. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 73, 729–752.
Tchetgen Tchetgen, E. J., & Shpitser, I. (2011). Semiparametric theory for causal mediation analysis:
Efficiency bounds, multiple robustness, and sensitivity analysis (Tech. rep.). Harvard University
School of Public Health, Cambridge, MA.

