Symposium

|

U.S. Elections

Did Illegal Overseas Absentee Ballots Decide
the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election?
Kosuke Imai and Gary King
Although not widely known until much later, Al Gore received 202 more votes than George W. Bush on election day in Florida.
George W. Bush is president because he overcame his election day deficit with overseas absentee ballots that arrived and were counted
after election day. In the final official tally, Bush received 537 more votes than Gore. These numbers are taken from the official results
released by the Florida Secretary of State’s office and so do not reflect overvotes, undervotes, unsuccessful litigation, butterfly ballot
problems, recounts that might have been allowed but were not, or any other hypothetical divergence between voter preferences and
counted votes. After the election, the New York Times conducted a six-month investigation and found that 680 of the overseas
absentee ballots were illegally counted, and almost no one has publicly disagreed with their assessment. In this article, we describe
the statistical procedures we developed and implemented for the Times to ascertain whether disqualifying these 680 ballots would
have changed the outcome of the election. These include adding formal Bayesian model averaging procedures to models of ecological inference. We present a variety of new empirical results that delineate the precise conditions under which Al Gore would have
been elected president and offer new evidence of the striking effectiveness of the Republican effort to prevent local election officials
from applying election law equally to all Florida citizens.

Introduction

M

any aspects of the 2000 presidential election were the
subject of considerable media interest, litigation, and
academic analysis during the uncertain month that followed the voting. But one aspect of the election, Florida’s overseas absentee ballots, received little attention and was the object
of no legal action. Yet it determined the outcome: if only the
votes cast on election day were counted, Al Gore would have
beat George W. Bush by 202 votes and become president.
According to official results from the State of Florida, it took
the overseas absentee ballots for Bush to outdistance Gore,
which he did in the end by 537 votes (see table 1). The extent
to which the law was followed in this small but consequential
part of the story escaped scrutiny for some time. After the
election was certified, however, the New York Times conducted

Kosuke Imai is assistant professor in the department of politics,
Princeton University (kimai@Princeton.edu). Gary King is
the David Florence Professor of Government, Harvard University (king@harvard.edu). The authors are deeply grateful to
the many private citizens of every political stripe who sent us
comments on this paper; also to Jim Alt, Barry Burden, James
Honeker, Doug Rivers, and Jonathan Wand for helpful
discussions; to Henry Brady for many suggestions; and to
the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes
of Aging, and the World Health Organization for research
support. Software to implement the methods in this article is
available at http://gking.harvard.edu.

a six-month investigation, during which it retrieved the envelopes in which the ballots were mailed and searched for violations of the law.1 In one of the longest sets of articles ever
published by the Times, the news organization concluded that
680 of the overseas absentee ballots that had been counted by
Florida counties unambiguously violated one or more aspects
of Florida election law and, by any reasonable interpretation of
the law, should have been discarded. Indeed, after the Times
story appeared, commentators and partisans from both sides
accepted these factual claims.2
In comparison with other features of the election that have
been studied, this problem was not caused by old machines or
the inattention of local election officials. It also does not rely
on somehow inferring the intent of the voters. Rather, according to the Times, the overseas ballot problem was due to blatantly illegal actions on the part of local election officials,
encouraged by Republicans, that had not been previously
noticed. The Times argued that these local officials were influenced by the deliberate political strategies employed by the
Bush campaign and by comparative neglect from the Democrats.3 The Times concluded that “under intense pressure from
the Republicans, Florida officials accepted hundreds of overseas absentee ballots that failed to comply with the state laws.” 4
Were these 680 inappropriately counted ballots enough to have
thrown the election to the wrong candidate? The Times hired
us to find out. Our conclusions were presented as part of the
story 5 and our methods were briefly described in a sidebar.6
In this article, we discuss in detail the methods we developed
for this project. The case calls for ecological inference: we observe
the number of bad ballots found in each Florida county and
September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 537

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Symposium

|

U.S. Elections
Invalid Overseas
Absentee Ballots
in Florida

Table 1
Official results of the 2000 presidential election in Florida

On July 15, 2001, the New York
Times published “How Bush
Ballots cast/received by Nov. 7
2,911,417
2,911,215
Gore leads by 202
a
Took Florida: Mining the OverLate overseas absentee ballots
836
1,575
Bush leads by 739
seas Absentee Vote.” The Times
Total
2,912,253
2,912,790
Bush leads by 537
reporters described the details of
Source: Office of the Secretary of State, Florida.
the Bush campaign effort to
a
Ballots counted from November 7 to 26, 2000.
secure victory by pressuring
selected local election officials to
count invalid overseas absentee
ballots in Florida. In particular,
the number of ballots cast and counted for each candidate.
Republicans focused on military ballots and counties where
From these variables and other auxiliary information we try to
Bush had his strongest voting base. For example, in counties
infer the total number of bad ballots cast for each candidate
such as Escambia and Santa Rosa, Bush lawyers argued that
and determine whether this is enough to offset Bush’s official
every vote cast by Americans in uniform should be counted,
537 vote margin.
regardless of the letter of the law. In Democratic counties,
Since the partisan atmosphere surrounding public discourse
Bush’s lawyers argued exactly the opposite—that local election
on this issue was so highly charged, we knew that our work
officials must follow the letter of the law and disqualify any
would be subject to more than the usual academic and public
ballot not meeting the rules.
scrutiny and sought methods that would be least vulnerable to
According to the Times, this unequal pressure led to unequal
partisan criticism. We therefore used three separate approaches:
treatment by local officials of overseas voters. That partisans
Inference (1) with no statistical assumptions, (2) with a sucwould pursue their interests creatively, relentlessly, and even
cession of single models that any partisan might have considinconsistently in different places is neither a novel claim nor
ered, and, finally, (3) with Bayesian model averaging, which
remotely illegal. That local election officials would respond to
enabled us to average over all of these single models, using
this pressure by treating voters unequally is, however, a more
weights based on the relative probability that each model is
serious claim. The Times’ view—“the result was unequal treatcorrect, as estimated from the data. So that others can use
ment of ballots with the same flaws”—contradicts statements
these methods to analyze similar problems, we have included
by Katherine Harris that the rules were applied uniformly.7 It
also would seem to violate the Equal Protection Clause of the
all new methods introduced here in the program EI: A ProU.S. Constitution, which was part of the stated grounds under
gram for Ecological Inference.
which the United States Supreme Court in Bush v. Gore stopped
We estimate the probability that Gore would have won the
the manual recounts.
election if the law had been followed in this instance. This
The 680 ballots that the Times judged as flawed fell into one
probability is small, but we show that with mathematical ceror more of the following categories: 8 344 ballots had late,
tainty it is greater than zero. Secondly, although our results
illegible, or missing postmarks (postmarks must indicate that
suggest that it is unlikely that illegal overseas absentee ballots
the ballot was cast on or before election day); 9 183 ballots had
alone changed the election outcome, we show that Bush’s marU.S. postmarks (overseas absentee ballots must bear foreign
gin of victory would likely have been much narrower if those
postmarks); 169 ballots were received from voters who were
flawed ballots had not been counted. This supports the argunot registered, who had failed to sign the envelope, or who had
ment made by the Times that the flawed ballots favored Bush
not requested a ballot; 96 ballots lacked the required signature
much more than Gore. We also present a variety of results that
or address of a witness; 19 voters cast two ballots, both of
did not appear in the Times article, including the probability
which were counted; and 5 ballots were received after the
that Gore would have won under various hypothetical scenarNovember 17 deadline but were counted anyway. If we knew
ios, such as if Florida Secretary of State Katherine Harris had
for which candidate the illegal ballots were cast, we would
accepted Palm Beach County’s recount, which was submitted
immediately know their effect on the election. However, the
two hours late. In some plausible scenarios, the probability
secret ballot makes this impossible in most cases. In this instance,
that Gore would have won is nearly 100 percent. Finally, and
voter anonymity was maintained by separating the envelope,
perhaps most interesting, we present evidence that the propenwith all the information above, from the ballot contained therein
sity of local election officials to violate the law and accept bad
after the ballot was counted. Thus we only have access to these
ballots was substantially greater in counties where Bush stratenvelopes, the names of the counties in which they were
egists believed there was more absentee ballot support for their
counted, and county-level data on the number of bad ballots
candidate and tried to convince election officials to accept bad
and the number of ballots cast for Gore and Bush.
ballots. This is consistent with the Times’ thesis and evidence
Table 2 illustrates the estimation problem at the state level.
that local election officials yielded to the will of Republican
The question marks indicate the unknown quantities to be
lobbyists.
Gore

538

Perspectives on Politics

Bush

Margin

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Bush’s margin 5 official margin

Table 2
Ecological inference problem in Florida
Invalid ballots
Valid ballots
a

2 [Bush’s bad ballots 2 Gore’s bad ballots]

Gore

Bush

Others

Total

?a
?

?
?

?
?

680
1,810

836

1,575

79

2,480

5 537 2 @~1 2 b bad )680 2 b bad 680]
5 1360b bad 2 143.

(1)

Once we estimate this quantity, we can also estimate the probability of Gore’s victory, Pr(Bush’s margin , 0).12

Question marks indicate unknown quantities to be estimated.

Analysis without statistical assumptions
The parameters in table 3 follow an accounting identity,
estimated. The table illustrates that while we know the aggregate number of invalid and valid ballots, as well as the total
number of votes each candidate obtained from overseas absentee voters, we do not know their composition, which is the
goal of the analysis. Analogous contingency tables exist for all
67 Florida counties, and the same ecological inference problem exists in each. We received three other kinds of data for
each county. First, from voter registration records, we have
individual-level data about overseas absentee voters, including
their sex, race, party registration, and whether they were military personnel or civilians. Second, for comparative purposes,
we have data available for election day voters in the 67 counties. Finally, the Times provided us indicator variables for four
regions in Florida and some other measures. We use this extra
information to improve our ecological inferences.

Ecological Inference for Flawed Ballots

Table 3 presents our notation. For each county i ~i 5 1 , . . . ,
67!, we denote the proportion of invalid ballots among all
overseas absentee ballots as Xi and the total number of overseas absentee ballots which were counted as Ni . We let Gore’s
proportion of the vote be Ti . To simplify presentation, we
combine the votes for Bush and the other minor candidates
as Bush votes.10 While each of these quantities is observed,
we denote unobserved quantities with Greek letters: bibad and
good
represent the proportions of invalid and valid ballots,
bi
respectively, cast for Gore.
good
are used for estimation, our ultiAlthough bibad and bi
mate quantity of interest is Bush’s margin after dropping the
invalid absentee ballots. To define this quantity, first define the
statewide fraction of bad ballots that went to Gore ( b bad ) as
the weighted average of the individual county quantities: 11

Table 3
Ecological inference for invalid overseas
absentee ballots in Florida
Invalid ballots
Valid ballots

Gore

Bush

bibad
good
bi

1 − bibad
good
1 − bi

Ti

1 − Ti

Xi
1 − Xi

good

Ti 5 bibad Xi 1 bi

~1 2 X i !,

(2)

that is generated by the aggregation process, and therefore
always holds exactly with no stochastic term. It also implies a
deterministic linear relationship between the two unknown
parameters,13
good

bi

5

Ti
Xi
2
b bad ,
1 2 Xi 1 2 Xi i

(3)

that traces out what King calls a tomography line.14 In addition, before we observe Xi and Ti in any county, we also know
good
are each between 0 and 1. Once we
that bibad and bi
observe X i and Ti , we can narrow the bounds further by projecting the line in equation (3) to the two axes. Thus, without
any statistical assumptions, we can derive the upper and lower
good
and bibad for each county i, which in turn
bounds of bi
imply the bounds for our quantity of interest, Bush’s margin
after dropping the flawed overseas absentee ballots.
Table 4 shows how the analysis of bounds can be very powerful in some situations. For example, Escambia is one of the
counties where many invalid ballots were found. At the same
time, this county is one of Bush’s strongholds. Seventy-six percent of the county’s 208 overseas absentee ballots, or 154 votes,
went to Bush, with Gore receiving 47 and 7 more cast for
other candidates. Later, 102 of these ballots were deemed invalid. Because Bush had 154 total votes, it is possible that all 102
of the invalid ballots were cast for him. This produces the
lower bound on the number of valid Bush votes, namely 52.
The upper bound occurs when Gore and other candidates get
assigned the maximum number of invalid ballots. Since Gore
had 47 votes and other candidates received 7, the maximum
number of invalid ballots that can be assigned to them is 54,
leaving 48 invalid votes for Bush. Hence the maximum number of valid votes for Bush is his official count of 154 minus
48, or 106. Finally, Baker County illustrates why the secret
ballot is sometimes not really secret. Only one absentee ballot
was cast there, and it was also found to be invalid. Therefore,
we know from the total tally of absentee ballots in this county—
one vote for Bush—that this person voted for Bush, and that
his or her ballot was invalid but included in the official count.15
From these county-level bounds, we derive aggregate bounds
for the total number of invalid ballots for each candidate at the
state level. The result shows that at least 8 percent, or 128
votes out of the 1,575 absentee ballots cast for Bush, should
September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 539

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Symposium

|

U.S. Elections

Table 4
Analysis of bounds for the state and selected counties
Gore’s votes
County
Escambia
Santa Rosa
Baker
All counties

Total
invalid
ballots

Official
counts

Min.

102
55
1
680

47
16
0
836

0
0
0
309

Bush’s votes

Valid ballots
Max.

Min.

47
16
0
831

154
65
1
1,575

52
10
1
907

Statistical analysis with a single model specification
The lack of any statistical assumptions puts the analysis presented in the preceding section on firm footing. In fact, measurement error aside, its conclusions contain no inferential
uncertainties at all (which is quite unusual for social science
research). If the resulting bounds excluded the chance of one
candidate winning, our analysis would end here. Unfortunately, the bounds only reveal that there exists a possibility that
either Gore or Bush received more votes. Indeed, even if all
but a tiny piece of the bounded interval reflected a Bush (or a
Gore) victory, it would provide no information about the probability that a particular candidate won other than that zero is
excluded (since the bounds alone do not imply any probability
distribution over the interval). Since this probability was the
quantity of interest for our project, the Times reporters needed
us to go further than the bounds. They needed us to make an
inference about the probability that around 90 percent of the
bad ballots went to Bush, which, if true, would have produced
a Gore victory.
To learn more about who actually won the Florida election—
the likely margins of victory within the deterministic bounds—
the only option is to add some statistical assumptions. With
them, we can make probabilistic statements about our quantities of interest. The problem with any model-based statistical
analysis, of course, is that there might be disagreement about
the assumptions to be made. The price we must pay for the
more precise results that follow is the additional uncertainty
540

Perspectives on Politics

Valid ballots

Official
counts

not have been counted; whereas the minimum number of invalid ballots for Gore is only 5 out of his total 836 votes (0.6
percent). Furthermore, Bush could have inappropriately benefited from up to 668 out of the 680 invalid ballots.
The most significant conclusion from this analysis is that
we cannot exclude the possibility that Gore actually won the
election. That is, without making any assumptions other than
that the Times coding decisions were correct (and again, we
saw no significant objection to them in the media discussion
that followed their story), the 537 vote margin for Bush now
changes to somewhere from a 126 vote victory for Gore to a
936 vote victory for Bush. However, once the ballots were
removed from the envelopes, America forever gave up the possibility of knowing for certain who won the most votes in
Florida’s 2000 election.

Others
Valid ballots

Max.

Official
counts

Min.

Max.

106
28
1
1,447

7
2
0
79

0
0
0
0

7
2
0
79

due to model specification. This is a common problem in
social science research, but it is particularly salient when attempting to provide independent, nonpartisan advice in the midst
of one of the most highly charged partisan debates in modern
times. Our approach to this problem is to formally incorporate uncertainty due to model specification into our final
estimate.
We use the class of ecological inference models (now called
EI after the software that implements them) given in King’s A
Solution to the Ecological Inference Problem.16 The choices of
models within this class have been contested in specific applications since, as with any ecological inference technique, models require identifying assumptions that may or may not be
appropriate.17 Nevertheless, EI is used in most academic ecological inference applications as well as in legislative redistricting litigation.18
To begin, we summarize graphically the bounds obtained
above. For each Florida county, we show all possible values of
good
bibad and bi . As it turns out, the data tell us more than
merely the bounds on each parameter separately since equagood
is near the top of its bounds, bibad
tion (3) says that if bi
must be near the bottom of its bounds. In fact, the two are
perfectly correlated and fall on a line defined by that equation.
To illustrate, we chart one line for each county in Florida in
the tomography plot of figure 1, which merely reexpresses the
data in the form closest to the answers we seek. This is as far as
it is possible to go without making statistical assumptions.
Next, we add three assumptions, all conditional on X and a
specified set of control variables Z. We could begin with the
good
are the same for all counties,
assumption that bibad and bi
which is essentially Goodman’s regression.19 This would be
enough to identify the model, but it would be a very strong
assumption, and indeed in our application it can be rejected
with certainty by merely examining figure 1.
good
are the same
Thus, instead of assuming that bibad and bi
over counties, we assume that they come from the same distribution (the truncated bivariate normal distribution, with truncation kept to the square in the figure). The idea is that whatever
the values of the unknown parameters from Florida’s 67 counties on their respective tomography lines, they all have something in common—since they are all in the same state, subject
to almost the same electoral campaign, et cetera. Differences
of any size across the counties in these parameters are therefore

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Figure 1
Tomography plot for invalid overseas absentee ballots.
good
are the proportion of Gore’s invalid and valid
bibad and bi
ballots, respectively. Each line traces out the possible values
good
point for each county i. The thick solid
of the bibad, bi
line represents Escambia County.

allowed so long as they are either random and fit the distributional assumption, or they are systematic and taken into account
by control variables. The main constraints added by this assumption are that the bivariate density is unimodal (which is the
formalization of the assumption that the counties “have something in common”) and that all volume under the density
appears over the square represented by the tomography plot.
Violations of this distributional assumption do not seem to
affect the quantities we need for this application.20
The second assumption is the absence of residual spatial
correlation in T after taking into account X and Z. King’s
ecological inference model has been shown to be relatively
insensitive to anything but extreme levels of spatial autocorrelation,21 but we make this assumption even more plausible by
including tests with covariates that tap into Florida’s regions
and other spatial features.
The final assumption states that the two unknown quantities,
good
bad
bi and bi , are independent of Xi , given Z. For example, if
more bad ballots cast for Gore, bibad , came from counties with
more bad ballots overall, X i , then this assumption would be violated unless Z included variables that sufficiently controlled for
this relationship. This is the most critical of the three assumptions, and so the validity of the analysis depends on the content
of Z. Each of these three assumptions can be modified or relaxed
by the inclusion of different covariates, Z, and so the main model
uncertainty that is assumed presently is Z.
Statistical analyses that acknowledge model uncertainty
Sensitivity to model specification in quantitative political science is perhaps most commonly seen when minor changes
among the explanatory variables in regression-type analyses
result in large differences in the estimates. The endemic nature

of such model dependent inferences makes a decision to base
inferences on a single model highly dubious in many situations. This is particularly true in ecological inference, where
model dependence is frequently an issue. Yet, almost all existing applications of ecological inference use a single specification. Indeed, few use any explanatory variables, Z, at all.
The partisan nature of the controversy in which we were
providing advice makes the issue of model dependence especially salient, although its nature is not markedly different from
other applications. We began by following the most common
procedure of estimating many models (i.e., with different Z !
and assessing the degree to which our ultimate quantities of
interest depend on the specification. This was informative but
insufficient, since our task was to provide a single inference
with a point estimate and confidence interval.
Three basic ways of drawing a single inference in the presence of model uncertainty exist. Some researchers persist in
choosing a single model, perhaps on the basis of qualitative
arguments about its merits, and draw inferences assuming its
veracity. This optimistic approach often overestimates the degree
to which the researcher is certain of the correct model specification, and hence typically gives biased estimates and overly
narrow confidence intervals. Other researchers use a formal
model selection criterion, such as stepwise regression, Mallow’s Cp, or AIC, to pick the best model. Although these
procedures are inappropriate when estimating causal effects,
they are reasonable when the quantity of interest is predictive,
such as ecological inference. Unfortunately, even in these situations, the result of applying these criteria is one model, which
also ignores model uncertainty.
An approach now widely recognized to be superior to standard model selection criterion is Bayesian model averaging,
which we apply to our ecological inference problem. The basic
idea is to estimate a large number of potential models and take
the weighted average of their results, with weights based on the
probability that a model is correct. The correctness of the model
is not assumed ex ante, nor is it merely based on goodness of
fit; it is instead calculated from the data via Bayesian analysis.
The key result of Bayesian model averaging is that the resulting inferences (1) are more accurate than those produced by
standard model selection criterion, (2) formally incorporate
model uncertainty, and (3) outperform any of the individual
models that are averaged over. The last property does not depend
on whether the true model generating the data lies inside or
outside models averaged over. That is, inferences from Bayesian model averaging always outperform any individual model
considered.22 Model averaging thus allows one to consider a
wide range of models, while still producing one set of results.
Of course, one can never cover the entire model space, which
is normally of infinite size, since Bayesian model averaging
only allows one to include a finite number of models. Therefore, the resulting inferences can always be improved by adding additional models, no matter how many models have already
been included. This is not a unique feature of Bayesian model
averaging since it is always possible to come up with a better
model for any statistical analysis where the correct model is
September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 541

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Symposium

|

U.S. Elections

unknown to researchers. However, Bayesian model averaging
offers a significant improvement over the usual approach of
basing inferences on one assumed model, no matter how that
model is chosen.
Bayesian model averaging is especially important in our application since political scientists have rarely studied absentee
ballots, and we therefore have little prior theory with which to
assist in model specification. The procedure thus enables us to
conduct an analysis without having to defend one particular
specification, or even a small set of specifications. We came up
with our list of models by talking in detail to reporters and
partisans on both sides. We then formalized their intuitions
into an ecological inference model (by defining Z ! and included
every one in our analysis. We also added several other models
we came up with independently.
Our search for models identified 31 possibilities for Z, including the race, sex, and party registration of overseas absentee voters as well as models based on 24 county-level election and
demographic variables. We also include a model with no covariates, and three models with Xi as the covariate for the mean of
b bad, b good, and for both.23 Each of our models includes at most
two covariates. In part this is because no one, including journalists and academics, proposed a model that clearly was defined
by more. But more importantly, we know that better predictions can be obtained when not overfitting the data with too
many covariates. Jennifer Hoeting and colleagues,24 David Madigan and Adrian Raftery,25 and many others have shown that
Bayesian model averaging almost never puts much weight on
such models, and predictive inferences (unlike some causal inferences) are typically better with parsimonious specifications.26
Although we know of no application of ecological inference
that uses more than a single explanatory variable (and almost
all applications use none), we also tried expanding our setup
from 0, 1, and 2 variable models to ones that include several 3
and 4 variable specifications. While some of these highly computationally intensive models had large enough estimated
weights to be meaningful, including them in the Bayesian model
averaging procedure did not appreciably change our substantive estimates. Of course, we have also omitted an infinite
number of other possible models from the set we average over,
and it is possible that future researchers will find and include a
model we excluded that would change our empirical conclusions. For example, we exclude all models with more than four
explanatory variables, as well as all interactions and all models
based on data we do not have. Our Bayesian model averaging
results are known to be better than any individual model among
those we average over; but our results could be overturned if
someone finds a plausible model to add that has a high probability of being correct and leads to different inferences.

Empirical Results
Would Gore have won the election without the bad ballots? In
this section we discuss that possibility, as well as a variety of
more specific counterfactuals, and evidence about how local
election officials differentially responded to Republican pressure in their application of local election law.
542

Perspectives on Politics

Figure 2
Posterior distribution of Bush’s margin of victory
without the 680 invalid overseas absentee ballots.

The probability that Gore would have won without
bad absentee ballots
Figure 2 portrays the posterior distribution from our analysis
of Bush’s margin of victory if the bad ballots had not been
counted (the histogram of 1000 draws from the posterior).
Note first that, as required by the procedure, all area for this
distribution is contained within the bounds we found for this
quantity of 2126 to 936. The weight of the statistical evidence
within these bounds clearly demonstrates that Bush benefited
from the bad ballots, and that removing them takes away from
his margin. This is evident in the figure because almost all of
the area of the histogram of posterior probability falls to the
left of the official margin of 537 votes. The mean margin of
victory for Bush without the bad ballots is only 251 votes. The
figure also portrays the probability that Gore actually won the
election by the area under the curve to the left of zero. This is
only about 0.2 percent, indicating that Gore probably would
not have won, even if the bad ballots had been discarded.
Other counterfactuals
While our results indicate that it is unlikely that invalid overseas absentee ballots alone changed the election outcome, the
illegally counted ballots could have had a much more significant effect when combined with slight changes in decisions
regarding the manual recounts. We show this result by first
focusing on several scenarios involving the two key counties
where a manual recount was conducted—Miami Dade and
Palm Beach. In Miami Dade County, election officials decided
to stop the manual recount when they determined that they
could not meet the deadline set by the Florida Supreme Court,
5 PM Sunday, November 27. Their partial manual recount gave
a net gain of 157 votes to Gore. Officials in Palm Beach County
also concluded that they could not finish the manual recount
in time. But while they submitted the outcome of their partial
recount just before the deadline—a net gain of 192 votes for

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Table 5
Estimated margin and probability of victory if the invalid overseas
absentee ballots had not been counted, with selected other
counterfactuals (each excluding invalid absentee ballots)
Invalid overseas ballots alone
Actual recounts
Miami Dade partial recount
Palm Beach recount
Miami Dade and Palm Beach
Media recounts
No U.S. Supreme Court decision a
Vote adjustments b
Gore’s request granted c
Hanging chads and dimples d
Only fully punched ballots e
Each county’s standard f

Bush’s margin

Prob(Gore wins)

251

0.002

94
59
−98

0.19
0.29
0.82

cent probability. If the entire state
had been recounted, according
to almost any standard for judging the punch cards, Gore would
have won the election with a very
high probability.

Indirect evidence of local
election officials responding
to Republican pressure
Six months of interviews and
archival research in Florida and
242
0.01
elsewhere led reporters from the
227
0.21
−26
0.73
New York Times to conclude that
−358
>0.99
“the Republicans mounted a legal
−366
>0.99
and public relations campaign to
−422
>0.99
persuade canvassing boards in
a
If the U.S. Supreme Court had not stopped the manual recount.
Bush strongholds to waive the
b
Including valid votes found by county officials after certification.
state’s election laws when countc
If Broward, Miami-Dade, Palm Beach, and Voulusia Counties had been recounted.
ing overseas absentee ballots. . . .
d
If all counties recounted using standard that any hanging chad or dimple included.
e
Their goal was simple: to count
If only fully punched ballots recounted in all counties.
f
If entire state recounted using standards adopted by each county.
the maximum number of overseas ballots in counties won by
Mr. Bush, particularly those with
a high concentration of military
Gore—they also reported the result of the complete recount to
voters, while seeking to disqualify overseas ballots in counties
Katherine Harris later that day. She, however, rejected this
won by Vice President Al Gore.” 29 The Times claimed that, as
complete recount as well as the two partial recounts and did
a direct result of this pressure,
not include them in the certified official tally, thereby denying
[C]anvassing boards in about a dozen Republican-leaning counties
Gore a total of 349 votes.27
had reconvened for a second round of counting. In each place, longThe panel of table 5 marked “actual recounts” presents our
standing election rules were bent and even ignored. Boards counted
prediction for Bush’s margin and Gore’s probability of victory
ballots postmarked as many as seven days after the election, including
in situations where the invalid overseas absentee ballots had
some from within the United States. They counted two ballots sent by
fax. Officials in Santa Rosa County even counted five ballots that
been rejected and the recounts in one or both of these counties
arrived after the November 17 deadline. Again and again, election
had been included in the final tally. For example, if the
officials crossed out the words “REJECTED AS ILLEGAL” that had
recounted votes in Miami Dade and Palm Beach had all been
been stamped on ballot envelopes.30
counted, Gore would have won with a 0.82 probability, with
If these claims are correct, we ought to be able to find evidence
the uncertainty in this number coming only from our analysis
of them in our data. We therefore conducted two tests. In the
of the bad overseas absentee ballots. If only the Palm Beach
first, we divide Florida’s counties into three categories: the six
votes had been counted, Gore would have won with a 0.29
counties mentioned explicitly in the Times story where the
probability. To put it one way, the massive differences in the
Republicans pressured officials to count illegal ballots, the four
probabilities from 0.002 to 0.82 for a Gore victory were due to
counties mentioned where Republicans pressured local electhe decisions made by Katherine Harris. Of course, these decition officials not to count the ballots, and the remaining counsions could have been overturned by the courts, and the canties that were not mentioned. We then compute various statistics
didates could have influenced them if they had requested
for these three categories and present them for comparison in
statewide or different types of recounts.
table 6. (The results in this table were not available to the
In the last panel of table 5, we consider counterfactuals
reporters before their article appeared, so table 6 does reprewhere the invalid overseas absentee ballots had not been counted
sent an independent test.)
and election day voting recounts had occurred in various ways,
The evidence strikingly supports the Times’ account of events.
as suggested in a study conducted by a consortium of media
The first two columns of table 6 report on the characteristics
organizations.28 For instance, this analysis shows that if the
U.S. Supreme Court had not stopped the recount in Bush v.
of the county, information available to Republican strategists
Gore, the victor would have changed with only a 1 percent
before they started lobbying. With the exception of two counprobability. However, if Gore’s formal request that Broward,
ties with very few absentee ballots, the ones identified as areas
Miami Dade, Palm Beach, and Volusia Counties be recounted
where the Republicans focused their efforts to count ballots
had been granted, he would have been elected with a 73 perwere those with large populations of military personnel and
September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 543

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Symposium

|

U.S. Elections

Table 6
Counties classified by whether the New York Times reported evidence of Republican
pressure to count or not count overseas absentee ballots, compared
to an average for remaining counties not mentioned

Republican pressure to count
Collier
Duval
Escambia
Okaloosa
Pasco
Santa Rosa
Average
Counties not mentioned by the Times
Average
Republican pressure not to count
Alachua
Broward
Miami Dade
Palm Beach
Average
a
b

Military
ballots

Republican
vote

Bad ballot
acceptance a

Bad ballots
counted
for Bush b

All
ballots

46.7%
83.8
88.6
88.9
62.3
90.3
83.4

65.6%
57.5
62.6
73.7
48.0
72.1
60.0

53.7%
62.3
64.2
42.0
60.5
84.6
61.5

64.5%
67.8
80.3
69.4
76.4
84.4
74.3

60
637
272
189
53
93
1,304

67.6

51.8

30.0

71.5

1,751

46.8
46.9
44.4
45.3
45.6

39.8
30.9
46.3
35.3
38.1

12.5
21.8
11.7
40.7
17.2

54.5
54.3
57.1
56.2
55.4

77
213
306
53
649

Percent of bad ballots arriving with local election officials included in official count.
Estimated by our Bayesian model averaging ecological inference procedure.

Republican voters. Similarly, counties that the Times identified as places where Republicans discouraged the ballots from
being counted had consistently fewer military personnel and
Republican voters.
The result of the Republican efforts also appears to have
been successful. A larger fraction of bad ballots were counted
in those counties where Republicans tried to get them accepted
than the average, and a smaller fraction than the average were
counted in every county where the Republicans tried to have
them rejected. The fraction of accepted bad ballots that had
been cast for Bush supports the same theory: fewer had been
for Bush where the Republicans tried to have them rejected
than in every county where the Republicans tried to have them
accepted.
The Times’ report also helps explain some interesting variations in this table. In Duval County, for example, we would
have expected to find more Bush votes among the bad ballots
than we actually found, due to its large percentage of military
personnel. However, the Times reported that an election official on the Duval County canvassing board “held the line on
counting ballots with missing postmarks.” 31 Similarly, Pasco
County has relatively low numbers of military ballots and a
small Republican vote share. So we might expect it to have had
fairly few of the bad ballots being cast for Bush. Yet the story
also described the unusually strong Republican pressure applied
in this county: “‘It looks to me like we’ve got a lot of pressure
here,’ Judge Robert P. Cole, chairman of the Pasco board, said
as he faced a throng of cheering Republicans and more than a
544

Perspectives on Politics

dozen Bush representatives [and no officials from the Gore
campaign].” 32 Our quantitative results are consistent with this
qualitative evidence.
We also look for indirect evidence of local election officials
succumbing to pressure from representatives of the Republican Party by examining the posterior probabilities of each of
the 31 component models we included. Generally, if the Times’
hypothesis is right, we would expect that the covariates that
have the biggest effects would be related to areas where Republicans tried hardest to influence local officials. These would be
counties that the Republicans—if they were as rational and
deliberate as the Times suggested—expected to find the largest
numbers of bad ballots that, if counted, would help Bush’s
cause. Obviously, we have no such variable, but we do have a
variety of related variables. Table 7 gives the top six models
listed in order of the posterior probability of being correct.
The two with the largest effects are consistent with the theory
that the more absentee voters registered as Republicans, and
the more white absentee voters in a district, the more bad
ballots cast for Bush. (The negative sign indicates that Bush’s
lead is reduced when these ballots are not counted.) The other
covariates have comparatively small effects.
The large variation in our prediction for Bush’s margin across
the six models in table 7 emphasizes a clear advantage of our
Bayesian model averaging procedure. The variation results from
the large degree of model dependence in these data (because
the data have fairly wide bounds). For example, the specification with white absentee voters gives a confidence interval

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

litigated and the law applied
equally in every county (as Bush
v. Gore required of the votes cast
on election day), the bad ballots
might very well have been disqualified. Although Gore probably still would have lost the
Florida vote, we conclude that
no one will ever be able to say
Posterior
Bush’s margin
First
model
with certainty who would have
(95% C.I.)
difference
probability
won the American presidential
election. Also, if Florida’s secreBayesian Model Averaging
251
(69, 468)
Individual models
tary of state had held different
Registered Repub. absentee voters, 6 a
269
(97, 475)
−52
0.565
views on issues that were someDem. vote share, 19
232
(69, 448)
3
0.239
what open to discretion, the outBlack absentee voters, 10
231
(69, 440)
−2
0.102
come of the election might very
White absentee voters, 9
123
(−18, 315)
−23
0.033
well have changed. Of course,
Registered black Repubs., 25
229
(62, 441)
−6
0.021
Accepted absentee ballots, 27
218
(62, 409)
4
0.004
had the candidates expressed difa
ferent views on campaign spendEach model identified in the table by the covariate included, followed by the model number we assign
ing, Elian Gonzales, or any of a
to each in note 10.
variety of other issues, the outcome might have been different.
Our results also provide indirect
which, when considered in isolation from the other models,
but strong and independent support for the thesis that local
would not enable us to reject the hypothesis that Gore would
election officials yielded to the efforts of Republican strategists
have won if only the overseas absentee ballots had been rejected.
to follow the law in Gore counties but disregard it in Bush
This is obviously quite different from our overall result of only
areas.
a 0.2 percent probability that Gore won. Since different specFinally, we believe this article provides an especially good
ifications yield very different inferences, an analyst having to
example of the use of Bayesian model averaging. We have develchoose one model would be in the untenable position of havoped an application of it to the ecological inference model and
ing to defend choices without much prior evidence.
offer computer code for others to use. In applied work, BayesBayesian model averaging offers a way around this common
ian model averaging has been approximated, as, for example,
problem. Instead of results jumping dramatically from one
with the Bayesian information criteria (BIC), but its full verspecification to the next, inferences resulting from Bayesian
sion has not seen as much use as it could—and none before
model averaging do not change as much when new models are
this in political science. Bayesian model averaging is a clear
added to the specification, unless they have especially large
improvement on the usual situation, which entails having to
probabilities of being true. Of course, we cannot get someselect and defend a single model, but it is no panacea. A
thing for nothing. Our procedure is an improvement over
researcher never knows whether all relevant models have been
straight EI because we only need to assume that one of our 31
included and, although its results are more robust than singlemodels, or some combination of our 31 models, contains somemodel approaches, it is always possible to come up with a
thing close to the right model. This is in contrast to the usual
different list of models and produce different results. And so in
approach where we merely get one model from which to choose,
the end, as always, the investigator’s judgment plays an imporbut it is not a panacea: if someone comes up with a new idea
tant role in making inferences. Model averaging cannot subfor a model, we can include it; but if none or no combination
stitute for judgment, but it can help account for model
of those we consult comes close to the right model, then our
uncertainties where prior knowledge is not available. In the
procedure will obviously fail to give valid answers.
present case, where 100 percent confidence intervals are available (in the form of bounds on the parameters), we have addiConcluding Remarks
tional constraints on possible results.
Counterfactual analysis is difficult, especially when the subject
Appendix A: Technical Issues in
of the inference is far from the factual evidence. When the
Modeling and Estimation
counterfactual is very close to the data, however, we stand a
From one application of one specification of this model, we
good chance of making valid inferences.33 In the case of the
presidential elections in Florida, the counterfactuals are especompute the posterior density of a quantity of interest D by
drawing it from its posterior, conditional on the model
cially clear and could easily have happened, which makes the
P~ D 6Mk ,T ). To do this, we draw simulations of b bad and
results of this particular study somewhat more certain than
b good from their posterior and calculate simulations of D . Bayes’
usual. If the problem of the overseas absentee ballots had been
Table 7
Estimates of Bush’s margin of victory after dropping invalid overseas
absentee ballots—overall and for six component models with highest
posterior model probabilities among the 31 estimated.
The first differences represent the increase or decrease in Bush’s
estimated margin when the value of the covariate increases by
10 percentage points.

September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 545

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Symposium

|

U.S. Elections

theorem specifies that the posterior is proportional to the product of the prior times the likelihood, P( Q 6T ) } P(Q )P(T |Q !,
where P~Q ) is the prior probability distribution on some
unknown parameter Q, and P~T 6Q ) is the likelihood. Everything is conditioned on X, N, and Z, which we observe. We
use the standard independent prior on each parameter of Q as
described in King.34 This prior distribution and the likelihood
function together to define King’s model in a standard Bayesian framework.
Let Mk denote the k th model specification ~k 5 1, . . . , 31).
Then we make an inference about a quantity of interest D by
computing its posterior distribution via Bayesian model averaging. To do this, we first compute, for each model, the posterior distribution of D (computed from the posterior with D
being some known function of Q ): P( D |Mk ,T ). Then we
average over these models by weighting by the relative posterior probability that each model is correct given the data,
Pr~Mk 6T !: Pr( D |T ) 5 S31
k51 P~ D |Mk ,T ) Pr~Mk 6T !, where
the posterior model probability is Pr~Mk 6T ! 5 P~T 6Mk ! 3
Pr~Mk !/@S 31
j51 Pr~T 6Mj ! Pr(Mj )]. This is the probability that
model k is correct, given the set of models in the analysis; it
should not be confused with R 2 -like measures, which typically
reward models that over-fit without distinguishing systematic
from idiosyncratic features of the data.
To compute the posterior model probability, we need two
elements. The first is a prior probability that each model is
correct, Pr~Mk !, which we set to uniform. The other is the
marginal likelihood, P~T 6Mk !, which is obtained by averaging the likelihood over the prior distribution.35 The marginal
likelihood is “the probability of seeing the data that actually
were observed, calculated before any data became available.” 36
That is, instead of maximizing the likelihood with respect to
the parameter given the data, as we would do to compute the
maximum likelihood estimate, the marginal likelihood does
not have a maximization step: it is the average value of the
likelihood evaluated at parameter values drawn from their prior
density. (Although the quantity could be computed by simulation in this way, such a method tends to be highly inefficient,
especially for problems with relatively flat priors or high dimensional parameter vectors.)
To compute the marginal likelihood, we use the Laplace
approximation, which is known to perform well compared
with other methods.37 Its rate of approximation is O~n21 !,
which is considerably better than easier-to-apply methods such
as Bayesian information criteria (BIC), which has a rate of
only O~n21/2 !.38 For example, Robert Kass and Raftery say
that “even for very large samples, it [BIC] does not produce
the correct value.” 39 Hence, in our application the Laplace
approximation is more appropriate than BIC.

Appendix B: The Minor Effects of Minor
Candidates and Prior Densities
Here, we analyze the effects on our results of ignoring the
minor party candidates and study the sensitivity of our results
to our choices for model priors. Figure 3 plots the posterior
distribution of Bush’s new margin without invalid overseas
546

Perspectives on Politics

Figure 3
Sensitivity analysis of Bayesian model averaging.
The histogram is the posterior distribution of Bush’s new
margin for our model. The other lines give posterior
distributions from different models and prior specifications.

absentee ballots for different model specifications in comparison to our posterior distribution. The solid line in this figure
is an alternative specification of the ecological inference model
where we combine the votes for the minor candidates together
with those for Gore rather than with the votes for Bush, resulting in 31 new individual models corresponding to the 31 models already run. The posterior distribution for this model is
very similar to the results of our previous analysis, indicating
that our results do not depend on which model specification is
used. The other two lines represent the use of different prior
distributions for the coefficients of the covariate of each model.
We use different prior standard deviations for the coefficients
of the covariates to see if the results are sensitive to the choice
of the prior distribution. While some features of the posterior
do vary across specifications, the graph shows that model results
are not particularly sensitive to the prior specification. The
median posterior point in particular hardly changes across the
models.

Notes
1 Barstow and Van Natta Jr. 2001.
2 The only exception seems to have been Zelnick 2001.
3 The Democrats had planned to contest the absentee ballots. But Democratic Vice Presidential Candidate Joe Lieberman, appearing on Meet the Press, ended this strategy
when he explained that he “would give the benefit of
the doubt to ballots coming in from military personnel generally. . . . Al Gore and I don’t want to ever be part of anything that would put an extra burden on the military
personnel abroad who want to vote.” Gore backed him up
and left the Republican strategy unchallenged. Berke
2001.
4 Barstow and Van Natta Jr. 2001.
5 Ibid.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

6 Barbanel 2001.
7 Barstow and Van Natta Jr. 2001.
8 Ibid. Photographs of the bad ballots make the determination of flaws unambiguous; for examples, see http://
www.nytimes.com/images/2001/07/15/politics/absentee/
nat_ABSENTEE_count_index.html.
9 At times, the Republicans argued that military ballots
did not need a postmark because the law allowed those
in the military to send mail without postage. However,
according to the Times, Florida state law clearly required
overseas ballots to be “postmarked or signed and dated” by
election day. Barstow and Van Natta Jr. 2001.
10 Although our presentation always involves only the Bush/
Gore choice, our empirical results using deterministic
bounds, presented below, include the possibility of bad ballots having been cast for minor party candidates. We handle minor parties in our statistical analyses by ignoring
the problem at first and then conducting sensitivity analyses in appendix B; since votes for minor party candidates only total 3 percent, we find, as expected, that they
have a very small effect on the overall result. Other analyses (not shown) using more computationally intensive techniques designed to model these choices separately
confirm the results. See Rosen et al. 2001.
bad
67
11 The weighted average is b bad 5 S67
i51 Ni bi /Si51 Ni .
good
is not used in equation (1) but is neces12 Note that b
sary as an ancillary parameter during estimation.
13 Duncan and Davis 1953.
14 King 1997.
15 Indeed, the name, address, and individual vote cast by all
people in counties, like Baker, that cast all their absentee ballots for one candidate, are on the public record. This is
because the bounds have zero width whenever either Xi or
Ti is zero or one.
16 King 1997.
17 See, for example, Adolph and King 2003; Adolph et al.
2003; Anselin and Cho 2002a; Anselin and Cho 2002b;
Cho 1998; Cho and Gaines 2004; Freedman et al.
1998; Herron and Shotts 2003a; Herron and Shotts
2003b; King 1999; King 2002.
18 On parametric and nonparametric advances see Imai
and Lu 2004. See also King, Rosen, and Tanner 2004,
which includes methodological developments in ecological inference from contributors in many academic
disciplines.
19 Goodman 1959.
20 King 1997, table 9.2.
21 Ibid., table 9.1; King 2000.
22 E.g., Madigan and Raftery 1994. This result is similar to
insights from the closely related literature on committee
methods, although surprisingly the literatures have relatively few cross-citations. Bishop 1995; see also Rosen,
Jiang, and Tanner 2000; and Robert 1996. See Hoeting et al. 1999 for a general introduction to Bayesian
model averaging. Raftery and Zheng 2003 derive the optimality of its long-run performance. See Bartels 1997; Bar-

23

24
25
26

27
28
29

tels and Zaller 2001; and Erikson, Bafumi, and Wilson
2001 for political science applications that use an approximation to formal Bayesian model averaging.
A list of all 31 models follows: (1) no covariate, (2) Xi
for b bad, (3) Xi for b good, (4) Xi for both b bad and b good,
(5) military absentee voters, (6) registered Republican
absentee voters, (7) registered Democratic absentee voters, (8) female absentee voters, (9) White absentee voters, (10) black absentee voters, (11) Hispanic absentee
voters, (12) rejected military absentee voters, (13)
rejected registered Republican absentee voters, (14)
rejected registered Democratic absentee voters, (15) rejected
female absentee voters, (16) rejected white absentee voters, (17) rejected black absentee voters, (18) rejected
Hispanic absentee voters, (19) Democratic vote share
among residents, (20) vote share of Republican candidates, (21) vote share of other candidates, (22) registered Democratic residents, (23) registered Republican
residents/registered black Democratic residents, (24) proportion of voting age population not registered, (25)
black registered Democrats, (26) black registered Republican residents, (27) acceptance ratio of overall absentee ballots, (28) ratio of invalid absentee ballots, (29)
Panhandle Florida regional indicator variable, (30) southern Florida regional indicator variable, (31) corruption
indicator. All the covariates except indicator variables are
entered as a ratio varying from 0 to 1. Except the first
three models, the covariate was used to model the conditional untruncated mean of both parameters, b bad and
b good. Models (5) to (11) are based on information about
the absentee ballots, so different variables were available regarding the invalid and valid ballots; we used the former group to predict b bad and the latter to predict
b good. We reran each model with different starting values
to verify that we found the global maximum. We also
examined each of the tomography plots with confidence
regions to search for outliers or bad model fits. In addition, we plotted E~T 6 X ! or E~T 6 X, Z ! by X or Z, and
checked whether the observed T fell within the (say)
90 percent confidence interval 90 percent of the time.
Hoeting et al. 1999.
Madigan and Raftery 1994.
Multiple covariates uncorrelated with Xi cause no identification problems in EI. Ecological inference models that
do not incorporate information from the deterministic
bounds are not identified when including X i or variables
related to X. See Goodman 1953; King 1997. Thus,
to the extent that models that incorporate the bounds,
such as EI, are estimable when including Xi or covariates
that are related to Xi , the information that makes this possible is coming from the bounds. Predictions about the
quantities of inferences in EI are not often greatly
affected by including more than one covariate at a time.
Purdum 2000.
Fessenden and Broder 2001.
Barstow and Van Natta Jr. 2001, 1.
September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 547

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Symposium
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

38
39

|

U.S. Elections

Ibid., 16.
Ibid.
Ibid.
King and Zeng 2001; Lebow 2000.
King 1997.
The marginal likelihood is P~T 6Mk ! 5 *P(T 6Qk , Mk ! 3
P( Qk|Mk !d Qk , where P(Qj 6Mj ! is the prior distribution
for the parameter vector Q in Model k.
Kass and Raftery 1995, 776.
Raftery 1996; Lewis and Raftery 1997; DiCiccio et al.
1997. If a model is estimated through a Markov chain
Monte Carlo simulation, one can construct an algorithm
where the chain visits each model stochastically and
can thus compute the posterior model probability as a
direct output of the posterior draws. See Chib 1995. However, this requires constructing a new MCMC algorithm for each application.
Kass, Tierney, and Kadane 1989.
Kass and Raftery 1995, 778.

References
Adolph, Christopher, and Gary King. 2003. Analyzing
second-stage ecological regressions: Comment on Herron
and Shotts. Political Analysis 11 (1): 65–76.
Adolph, Christopher, and Gary King, with Michael C. Herron, and Kenneth W. Shotts. 2003. A consensus on secondstage analyses in ecological inference models. Political
Analysis 11 (1): 86–94.
Anselin, Luc, and Wendy K. Tam Cho. 2002a. Spatial effects
and ecological inference. Political Analysis 10 (3): 276–97.
_. 2002b. Conceptualizing space: Reply. Political Analysis 10 (3): 301–3.
Barbanel, Josh. 2001. How the ballots were examined. New
York Times, July 15. http://www.nytimes.com/.
Barstow, David, and Don Van Natta Jr. 2001. How Bush
took Florida: Mining the overseas absentee vote. New
York Times, July 15. http://www.nytimes.com/.
Bartels, Larry M. 1997. Specification uncertainty and model
averaging. American Journal of Political Science 41 (2):
641–74.
Bartels, Larry M., and John Zaller. 2001. Presidential vote models: A recount. PS: Political Science and Politics 33 (1): 9–20.
Berke, Richard L. 2001. Lieberman put Democrats in retreat
on military vote.” New York Times, July 15. http://www.
nytimes.com/.
Bishop, Christopher M. 1995. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chib, Siddhartha. 1995. Marginal likelihood from the Gibbs
output. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90
(432): 1313–21.
Cho, Wendy K. Tam. 1998. Iff the assumption fits . . . : A comment on the King ecological inference solution. Political Analysis 7: 143–63.
Cho, Wendy K. Tam, and Brian J. Gaines. 2004. The limits
of ecological inference: The case of split-ticket voting. American Journal of Political Science 48 (1): 152–71.
548

Perspectives on Politics

DiCiccio, Thomas J., Robert E. Kass, Adrian E. Raftery, and
Larry Wasserman. 1997. Computing Bayes factors by combining simulation and asymptotic approximations. Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (439): 903–15.
Duncan, Otis Dudley, and Beverly Davis. 1953. An alternative to ecological correlation. American Sociological Review
18 (6): 665–66.
Erikson, Robert S., Joseph Bafumi, and Bret Wilson. 2001.
Was the 2000 presidential election predictable? PS: Political Science and Politics 34 (4): 815–19.
Fessenden, Ford, and John M. Broder. 2001 Study of disputed Florida ballots finds justices not cast the deciding vote. New York Times, November 12.
Freedman, David A., Stephen P. Klein, Michael Ostland,
and Michael R. Roberts. 1998. Review of A solution to
the ecological inference problem. Journal of the American Statistical Association 93 (December): 1518–22.
Goodman, Leo. 1953. Ecological regressions and the behavior of individuals. American Sociological Review 18 (6):
663–64.
_. 1959. Some alternatives to ecological correlation. American Journal of Sociology 64 (6): 610–24.
Herron, Michael C., and Kenneth W. Shotts. 2003a. Using ecological inference point estimates as dependent variables in
second-stage linear regressions. Political Analysis 11 (1):
44–64.
_. 2003b. Cross-contamination in EI-R: Reply. Political Analysis 11 (1): 77–85.
Hoeting, Jennifer A., David Madigan, Adrian E. Raftery,
and Chris T. Volinsky 1999. Bayesian model averaging: A tutorial. Statistical Science 14 (4): 382–417.
Imai, Kosuke and Ying Lu. 2004. Parametric and nonparametric Bayesian modeling for ecological inference in 2 × 2
tables. Technical report, Department of Politics, Princeton
University.
Kass, Robert E., and Adrian E. Raftery. 1995. Bayes factors.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (430):
773–95.
Kass, Robert E., Luke Tierney, and Joseph B. Kadane. 1989.
Approximate methods for assessing influence and sensitivity in Bayesian analysis. Biometrika 76 (4): 663–74.
King, Gary. 1997. A solution to the ecological inference problem: Reconstructing individual behavior from aggregate
data. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
_. 1999. The future of ecological inference research: A
reply to Freedman et al. Journal of the American Statistical Association 94 (March): 352–55.
_. 2002. Isolating spatial autocorrelation, aggregation
bias, and distributional violations in ecological inference. Political Analysis 10 (3): 298–300.
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, and Martin A. Tanner, eds. 2004. Ecological inference: New methodological strategies. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
King, Gary, and Langche Zeng. 2001. When can history be
our guide? The pitfalls of counterfactual inference.
http://gking.harvard.edu.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

Lebow, Richard Ned. 2000. What’s so different about a counterfactual? World Politics 52 (4): 550–85.
Lewis, Steven M., and Adrian E. Raftery. 1997. Estimating
Bayes factors via posterior simulation with the LaplaceMetropolis estimator. Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (438): 648–55.
Madigan, David, and Adrian E. Raftery. 1994. Model selection and accounting for model uncertainty in graphical models using Occam’s window. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 89 (428): 1535–46.
Purdum, Todd S. 2000. Counting the vote: The overview.
New York Times, November 27. http:// www.nytimes.com/.
Raftery, Adrian E. 1996. Hypothesis testing and model
selection. In Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice: Interdisciplinary statistics, ed. W. R. Gilks, S. Richardson, and
D. J. Spiegelhalter, 163–87. London: Chapman and Hall.

Raftery, Adrian E., and Yingye Zheng. 2003. Discussion: Performance of Bayesian model averaging. Journal of the American Statistical Association 98 (464): 931–38.
Robert, C. P. 1996. Mixtures of distributions: inference and
estimation. In Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice:
Interdisciplinary statistics, ed. W. R. Gilks, S. Richardson,
and D. J. Spiegelhalter, 441–64. London: Chapman
and Hall.
Rosen, Ori; Wenxin Jiang, Gary King, and Martin A. Tanner
2001. Bayesian and frequentist inference for ecological inference: The R × C case. Statistica Neerlandica 55 (2):
134–56.
Rosen, Ori, Wenxin Jiang, and Martin A. Tanner. 2000. Mixtures of marginal models. Biometrika 87 (2): 391–404.
Zelnick, Bob. 2001. The myth of a stolen election (letter to
the editor). Wall Street Journal, July 17.

September 2004 | Vol. 2/No. 3 549

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592704040332

