American Economic Association

Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
Author(s): Louis S. Jacobson, Robert J. LaLonde and Daniel G. Sullivan
Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 4 (Sep., 1993), pp. 685-709
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2117574
Accessed: 26-02-2019 22:24 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to The American Economic Review

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
By Louis S. JACOBSON, ROBERT J. LALONDE, AND DANIEL G. SULLIVAN*

We exploit administrative data combining workers' earnings histories with

information about their firms to estimate the magnitude and temporal pattern of
displaced workers' earnings losses. We find that high-tenure workers separating
from distressed firms suffer long-term losses averaging 25 percent per year. In
addition, we find that displaced workers' losses: (i) begin mounting before their
separations, (ii) depend only slightly on their age and sex, (iii) depend more on
local labor-market conditions and their former industries, (iv) are not, however,
limited to those in a few sectors, and (v) are large even for those who find new

jobs in similar firms. (JEL J65)

Both researchers and policymakers recognize that these displaced workers experience costly spells of unemployment and
short-term earnings declines. However,
there is less agreement about these workers'
long-term earnings losses, losses that may
greatly exceed those suffered during their
initial spells of unemployment. In this article, we use a new data set, derived from
administrative records of the state of Pennsylvania, to assess the magnitude and temporal pattern of these long-term losses. In
addition to better estimating the average
loss, we show how workers' losses vary according to their demographic characteristics, the industry and size of their former
employers, the conditions of their local labor market when they are displaced, and
whether they find new employment in their
former industry.
Theory suggests several reasons why displaced workers might experience earnings

Concerns about the plight of experienced
workers losing jobs due to trade liberalization, increased environmental protection,
or technological change have been an im-

portant part of recent public-policy debate.'

* Jacobson: Westat Incorporated, Rockville, MD
20850, and The W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI 49007; LaLonde:
Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, and the National Bureau of Economic Research; Sullivan: Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, Chicago IL, 60604. We thank Joseph Altonji,
David Card, Robert Gibbons, John Ham, Daniel
Hamermesh, Bruce Meyer, Canice Prendergast,
Christopher Ruhm, Jeffrey Smith, Robert Topel, and
seminar participants at the University of Pittsburgh,
the W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
the University of Chicago, the Univeristy of Illinois,
The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Princeton University, the University of Iowa, the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the Board of Governors, Texas
A&M University, and Johns Hopkins University for
helpful comments and Carolyn Thies and Melissa
Barnhart for extremely helpful research assistance. We
also thank the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry for providing the data used in this study and
technical assistance. This research was funded by the
Allegheny County Department of Planning, the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago,

debated what additional assistance to provide to workers who had exhausted their regular unemployment
insurance benefits. Concern about workers' jobs losses
also arose in the Congressional debate over whether
the Bush administration should have "fast-track" authority when negotiating a free-trade agreement with
Mexico and in discussions about how much protection

the W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
and the Industrial Relations Section at Princeton University.

1For instance, on several occasions during the re-

to accord the Spotted Owls in northwestern U.S.
forests.

cent recession, Congress and the Bush administration
685

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

686 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

losses beyond a period of unemployment
following their job losses. First, workers
possessing skills that were especially suited
to their old positons are likely to be less
productive, at least initially, in their subsequent jobs. Such a fit between workers' skills
and the requirements of their old jobs could
have resulted from on-the-job investment in
firm-specific human capital or from costly

search resulting in particularly good matches
with their old firms.2 Second, workers losing
jobs that paid wage premiums are likely to
earn less if their subsequent jobs pay standard wages. Such wage premiums could have
arisen because of direct or threat effects of
unions or because such premiums directly
raised workers' productivity on their old
jobs.3 Finally, displaced workers' long-term
earnings will be lower if, on their previous
jobs, they had accepted wages below their
level of productivity in return for higher
earnings later in their careers. Workers
might have accepted such "tilted" tenure
profiles in order to enhance their employers' incentives to invest in their human capi-

tal (see e.g., Edward P. Lazear, 1981).
Our study focuses on high-tenure workers
because they are the ones most likely to
have accumulated substantial amounts of
firm-specific human or "match" capital prior
to their job losses. Likewise, because wage
premiums and deferred compensation are
likely to decrease turnover, high-tenure
workers are more likely than others to experience losses for these reasons as well. However, beyond suggesting which workers are
likely to lose the most, the theories mentioned above do not provide much guidance
to policymakers and others as to the magnitude and persistence of displaced workers'
earnings losses. To answer such questions
requires empirical work like that presented
in this article. Indeed, research on the pattern of displaced workers' losses may shed

2For example, on the former possibility see Gary S.
Becker (1975), and on the latter possibility see Boyan
Jovanovic (1979).
3For example, on the former possibility see H. Gregg
Lewis (1986), and on the latter possibility see Joseph E.
Stiglitz (1974).

some light on the importance of those theories more generally.
Many studies, including several using the

Displaced Worker Survey (DWS) supplements to the Current Population Survey

(CPS) (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1988),
find that workers characterizing themselves
as displaced frequently report significantly
lower earnings on their new jobs.4 However,
the DWS has several shortcomings that
make it difficult to use in assessing the
magnitude and temporal pattern of displaced workers' earnings losses. These
shortcomings include the lack of a comparison group of nondisplaced workers, the lack
of extensive predisplacement earnings data,
and a documented tendency for workers
not to report more remote instances of

displacement (see e.g., Robert H. Topel,
1990). Recently, Christopher J. Ruhm (1991)
avoided these problems by using the Panel

Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to document significant long-term effects of displacement. We go beyond his work by employing a more comprehensive statistical
methodology and by documenting how the
estimated earnings losses vary over time and
among workers. This added detail should
aid assessments of the varied theoretical
explanations for the earnings losses discussed above.
To develop this detailed picture, we created an unusual longitudinal data set by
merging administrative records covering 52
quarters of workers' earnings histories with
information about their firms. The resulting
data set contains quarterly earnings histories for a large number of high-tenure displaced and nondisplaced workers, including
those who remained employed at displaced
workers' former firms. As we explain below,
these data offer several advantages over
those used in other studies.

4For the original analysis of the 1984 DWS, see Paul
Flaim and Ellen Seghal (1985). Daniel S. Hamermesh
(1989) summarizes a dozen displaced-workers studies.
More recent studies include John T. Addison and
Pedro Portugal (1989), Lori Gladstein Kletzer (1989),
Topel (1990), and Paul Swaim and Michael Podgursky
(1991).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 687

Like previous researchers, we find that
high-tenure workers incur large losses when
they separate from distressed firms. However, we also find a consistent temporal
pattern to these losses in which displaced
workers' relative earnings begin to decline
substantially three years prior to their separations, drop sharply when they actually
leave their jobs, and then rise rapidly during
the six quarters immediately following their
separations. After that point, however, these
workers' earnings recover very slowly, so
that five years after separating from their
former firms, their losses still amount to 25
percent of their predisplacement earnings.
This finding of large losses holds for virtually every group of workers that we examine, including males and females, as well as
younger and older workers. The losses exhibit greater variability among workers displaced from different industries and sizes of
firms and amidst different local labor-market
conditions. Nevertheless, our basic finding
holds for workers formerly employed across
a broad spectrum of industries and labormarket conditions. Further, even those who
find work in the same industries as their old
jobs experience large earnings losses.
The remainder of this article proceeds as
follows. In Section I we describe our longitudinal data and comment on some of their
strengths and shortcomings. In Section II
we discuss the statistical issues involved in
estimating the earnings losses incurred by
displaced workers. In Section III we present
estimates of the earnings losses for hightenure workers who separated from their
firms during the early and mid-1980's. Some
concluding remarks follow in Section IV.
I. The Pennsylvania Data

The statistical framework developed in
this article applies generally to the problem
of estimating earnings losses for displaced
workers. However, our empirical work assesses the magnitude and pattern of those
losses only for workers displaced in Pennsylvania during the early and mid-1980's. We
have limited our analysis to these workers in
order to take advantage of a rich set of
administrative data on Pennsylvanian work-

ers and their firms. By combining quarterly
earnings histories for a 5-percent sample of
the state's workers with their firms' employment data, we have created a data set that
contains workers' quarterly earnings extending from 1974 through 1986 as well as information about their firms, including employment levels and growth, geographic
location, and "four-digit SIC" industry.5 By
observing changes in the sources of earnings
we are able to date with relative accuracy
the quarter in which some workers separate
from their employers, as well as to identify
other workers who remain continuously employed by a single firm.
These administrative data have several
advantages over data used in other studies.
First, we have a large sample of nondisplaced workers. This allows us to borrow
statistical techniques from the programevaluation literature in order to obtain more
reliable estimates of the cost of displacement, including the cost related to the earnings growth that workers would have received in the absence of job loss. Second,
we are able to track workers' quarterly
earnings over a relatively long period of
time. This allows us to distinguish short-term
from long-term losses and also to be more
confident that our results are free of statistical biases.6 Third, we have data on a much
larger number of workers than are followed
in the PSID or the National Longitudinal
Surveys (NLS). This allows us to provide
useful results for relatively narrowly defined
groups of workers. Finally, we have information on employment changes in workers'
firms. This allows us to identify workers who
separated from distressed firms. Such workers are likely to have been displaced, rather
than to have quit or been dismissed for
cause.

5For details on how we constructed our data see the
Appendix.
6One interpretation of the exchange between
LaLonde (1986) and James J. Heckman and V. Joseph
Hotz (1989) is that reliable nonexperimental estimation
of program impacts requires data on workers a substantial amount of time prior to their participation.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

688 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

Our Pennsylvania data set also allows us
to avoid two problems inherent in the use of
the standard survey-based data sets. First,
earnings data in the CPS and PSID are
reported by workers with significant error,
while our data are based on firms' reports
that are used to calculate tax liabilities and
are presumably virtually free of measurement error (see Greg J. Duncan and Daniel
H. Hill, 1985; John Bound and Alan B.

Krueger, 1991). Second, workers in the DWS
are less likely to report instances of job loss,
the longer that the displacement occurred
prior to the interview date. If, as seems
likely, the less severe setbacks are the ones
that are not reported, it becomes difficult to
use these data to determine the rate of
recovery from job loss. By contrast, our administrative data allow us to identify all
separations experienced by workers.
Of course, there are also some disadvantages associated with the use of our data
set. Most obviously, we have data only on
Pennsylvanian workers. Although we cannot
be sure that our findings for these workers
reflect the experiences of displaced workers
generally, it is worth noting that Pennsylvania is a large state with a diverse industrial
base. Further, during the 1980's-the period covered by this study-the economic
performance of the eastern half of the state,
which shared in the growth experienced by

does not lead to any biases in our estimates
of average losses. However, lack of data
does limit the extent to which we can learn
how earnings losses vary among different
demographic groups. Similarly, lack of data
prevents us from decomposing earnings
losses into effects due to lower wages and
reduced hours. However, even given our
data limitations, we are able to provide a
substantially more complete assessment of
the determinants of long-term earnings
losses than has previously been possible.
Another possible shortcoming of our data
is that they do not explicitly identify whether
workers' separations resulted from quits,
discharges for cause, or displacements.7 In
order to minimize these ambiguities, we
constructed a "mass-layoff" sample that includes separators whose firms' employment
in the year following their departure was
30-percent or more below their maximum
levels during the late 1970's.8 This definition encompasses firms that closed around
the time of workers' separations, as well as
others that had large employment declines.
Although some employees from the masslayoff sample may have quit their jobs or
been discharged for cause, the vast majority
probably separated involuntarily from their
firm for economic reasons.
Finally, our data's most important disadvantage is that it is impossible to distinguish

the other middle-Atlantic states and New
England, was considerably better than that
of the western half, which experienced

double-digit unemployment rates (see
Jacobson, 1988). This variation allows us to
determine how losses depend on local
labor-market conditions and, by extension,
the importance of our restriction to Pennsylvanian workers.
Another disadvantage of our data is that
demographic information on workers is limited to their sex and date of birth. By comparison, data sets such as the DWS or the
PSID include a wider array of characteristics, among them workers' educational
attainments, their occupations, and their
marital and union statuses. The statistical
techniques that we employ below account
for unobserved heterogeneity in ways that
ensure that our lack of such information

7In related research Jacobson (1991) found that,
between 1977 and 1987, the rate of separations for
workers from Allegheny County (Pittsburgh) was 80
percent for workers with less than one year of tenure,
43 percent for workers with one year of tenure, 24
percent for workers with two or three years of tenure,
and 13 percent for workers with four or more years of
tenure. For those with four or more years of tenure,
one-half of the separations were estimated to be retirements, and one-third were estimated to be displacements. Thus the quit rate for that group would be
about 2 percent per year.

8This categorization of workers is less sensible for
those from small firms. Accordingly we further restricted our sample to those whose firms had at least 50
employees in 1979. We have experimented with other
similar definitions of "mass-layoff" and obtained results similar to those presented here.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 689

between workers who leave the Pennsylvanian wage and salary work force and workers who remain unemployed for long periods of time. In our administrative data
base, both groups of workers have zero
earnings. For the unemployed, those
earnings are their actual earnings; but, for
workers who moved out of the state, became self-employed, or were working under
a different social-security number, zero
clearly understates their actual earnings.9
Therefore, to avoid overstating workers'
earnings losses we have eliminated from our
sample the approximately 25 percent of
high-tenure separators who subsequently
never have positive earnings in our data.
Because some of those workers probably
were unemployed, we believe that this decision biases downward our displacement-cost
estimates. Without this sample restriction,
our estimates of the losses would be approximately 15 percentage points larger. Alternatively, even with this sample restriction,
we might overstate losses if the most resilient workers are significantly more likely
to move out of the state. However, we discount this latter possibility because, before
their separations, the excluded workers had
similar characteristics to the rest of the
sample. Moreover, in results not reported in
this article, we find that displaced workers
who move within Pennsylvania actually experience somewhat larger than average
losses.
To construct the sample of workers analyzed in this article, first we identified those
workers who had six or more years of tenure
by the beginning of 1980. Second, we restricted our sample to workers for whom we
had information on their age and sex and,

9Frederick J. Tannery (1991) used United States
Social Security Administration data to study the rates

at which workers left the Pennsylvania wage and salary
work force between 1979 and 1987. Although his sample is not restricted to high-tenure workers, he found
that, among those who left the Pennsylvanian wage and
salary labor force for reasons other than retirement, 60

percent had earnings outside the state. However,
among those who left the state by 1987, more than

one-half had 1979 earnings of less than $3,000, and less
than 8 percent had earnings greater than $20,000.

to avoid complications associated with early
retirement, to workers born between 1930
and 1959. Finally, to reduce biases due to
sample attrition, we required that every
worker receive some wage or salary earnings during each calendar year. This restriction ensures that the losses we observe result from wage and hours changes instead of
differing rates of nonemployment or missing
earnings data. As we have noted, its potential drawback is that the excluded separators may suffer systematically larger or
smaller losses.10
As shown by panel A of Table 1, the
separators' median 1979 age was 37, only
one year less than the median age of the
nonseparators. In addition, 80 percent of
both groups were between the ages of 27
and 47. Further, this characterization of
separators' ages holds for several groups in
our sample, namely, male and female workers, manufacturing and nonmanufacturing
workers, workers from eastern and western
Pennsylvania, and the mass-layoff and nonmass-layoff subsamples.
The earnings figures in panel B of Table
1 indicate that the median separator earned

$22,904 (1987 dollars) in 1979. With the
exception of the females in the sample, the
other separator groups received approximately the same earnings. Despite being
approximately the same age, the separators

earned approximately $2,000, or 9-percent
less than the median nondisplaced worker,
suggesting that the latter were more highly
skilled. This fact underscores the potential
importance of accounting for individualspecific heterogeneity when estimating earnings losses due to worker displacement.
Relatively simple earnings comparisons

suggest that displaced Pennsylvanian workers experienced substantial long-term earnings losses. For example, as shown by
Figure 1, the earnings of workers who sepa-

10Such potential sample selection problems are not
unique to studies using administrative data. For example, in the 1984 DWS, wage data were unavailable for
the approximately 40 percent of the sample who were

not employed at the survey date (see Flaim and Seghal,
1985).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

690 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993
TABLE 1-SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS

Standard 10th 90th
Workers Observations Mean deviation Median percentile percentile
A. Age in 1979:
Separators:

All
9,507
37.0
7.4
37
27
47
Males
7,092
36.9
7.2
37
27
47
Females
2,415
37.3
7.8
38
27
48
Nonmanufacturing 2,870 36.9 7.3 37 27 47
Manufacturing 6,637 37.1 7.4 37 27 47
Western Pennsylvania 3,804 36.8 7.4 37 27 47
Eastern Pennsylvania 5,703 37.1 7.3 37 27 47
Non-mass layoffs 3,072 36.9 7.3 37 27 47
Mass layoffs 6,435 37.1 7.4 37 27 47

Stayers

13,704

37.7

7.0

38

28

47

B. 1979 Earnings:
Separators:

All 9,507 $24,196 $12,287 $22,904 $11,525 $36,798
Males 7,092 27,363 12,161 25,942 16,326 38,557
Females 2,415 14,897 6,641 14,275 7,595 22,928
Nonmanufacturing 2,870 24,648 15,547 22,363 10,029 39,358
Manufacturing 6,637 24,001 10,566 23,096 12,070 35,963
Western Pennsylvania 3,804 25,147 12,449 24,292 12,359 37,561
Eastern Pennsylvania 5,703 23,561 12,138 22,176 11,005 36,140
Non-mass layoffs 3,072 23,640 14,415 21,665 10,585 36,726

Mass layoffs 6,435 24,461 11,120 23,593 12,037 36,805
Stayers 13,704 26,322 12,980 24,867 13,644 38,880

8000

-.

7000 -

oo

6~ 000

w

000
t 4000-

3000

2000

74.1 75.1 76.1 77.1 78.1 79.1 80.1 81.1 82.1 83.1 84.1 85.1 86.1 87.1

3 Separators E Stayers Quarter
FIGURE 1. QUARTERLY EARNINGS (1987 DOLLARS) OF HIGH-ATTACHMENT WORKERS SEPARATING IN
QUARTER 1982:1 AND WORKERS STAYING THROUGH QUARTER 1986:4

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 691

rated from their firms during the first quarter of 1982 fell sharply relative to the earn-

ings of workers who remained with their
firms through the end of 1986. Even four

years after separation, their earnings remained nearly $2,000 per quarter less than
their nondisplaced counterparts.
There are at least two ways to interpret
the differences between stayers' and separa-

ers' earnings losses. Next we describe our
statistical model. Finally, we discuss the circumstances that may lead to biases in our
estimates.
A. Definition of Earnings Losses

Many displaced-worker studies measure
losses as the difference between workers'
tors' earnings patterns. One interpretation
earnings in some postdisplacement period
is that because the earnings of displaced
and their earnings in a period shortly before
and nondisplaced workers were nearly the
separation. There are three reasons why
this measure may not capture the full efsame during the mid-1970's, their earningsrelated characteristics also must have been
fects of structural or public-policy changes
on workers' earnings. First, this measure
similar and, absent some adverse event, their
does not control for macroeconomic factors
earnings would have remained similar for
the rest of the sample period.1" Accordingly,
that cause changes in workers' earnings rethe earnings differences between the two
gardless of whether they are displaced. Secgroups that emerge in the late 1970's and
ond, this measure does not account for the
persist for the rest of the sample period
earnings growth that would have occurred
in the absence of job loss; in the long term,
should be interpreted as losses due to displacement or, more precisely, as losses due
workers' earnings may return to their preto the events that led to workers' displacedisplacement levels, but not to the levels
ments. Alternatively, the divergence beexpected prior to their job losses. Finally,
tween the two groups' earnings starting in
firms' declining fortunes may adversely afthe late 1970's might indicate that separafect workers' earnings several years prior to
their job losses. Therefore, to capture the
tors had more slowly growing earnings before their displacement and would have
full effect of the events that lead to workers'
continued to have had slow earnings growth
displacements, it is important to calculate
even without being displaced. Under this
their earnings declines relative to a point
interpretation, some or all of the postdisseveral years prior to their separations.
In this study, we define displaced workplacement earnings gap between separators
and stayers would have existed even if there
ers' earnings losses to be the difference
had been no separation. We argue below
between their actual and expected earnings
had the events that led to their job losses
that the first interpretation is the appropriate one.
not occurred. To make this definition more
II. Statistical Models of Earnings Losses

In this section, we develop a statistical
framework for summarizing the evidence on
the magnitude and the temporal and crosssectional patterns of displaced workers'
earnings losses. We begin by specifying more
precisely our definition of displaced work-

11As Table 1 suggests, the near coincidence of stay-

precise, we let yi, denote the earnings of

worker i at date t and let Di, = 1 if worker
i was displaced at date s (and Di s = 0 otherwise). Our definition of earnings loss is

the change in expected earnings if, several
periods prior to date s, it was revealed that
the worker would be displaced at date s
rather than being able to keep his or her job
indefinitely. More formally, our definition of
the loss is

(1) E(yitlDi,s = 1, Ii,s-p)

ers' and separators' mid-1970's earnings levels in Figure 1 is atypical.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

692 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

Another way to make this
point is to note at
where Ii 5_p is the information
available

date s - p, and p is sufficiently large that
the events that eventually lead to displacement would have not begun by date s - p.
This definition of workers' earnings losses
allows the events that lead to workers' displacements to affect earnings prior to separation. In addition, our definition compares
displacement at date s to an alternative that
rules out displacement at date s and at any
time in the future.12 This choice ensures
that we compare different cohorts of job
losers' earnings to a common standard and
simplifies the interpretation of several of
our empirical results.13
The magnitude and interpretation of
workers' earnings losses also depend on the

that, in order to understand the importance
of workers' attachments to particular firms,
we must observe variation in outcomes for
similar workers in different firms. This is
impossible if we assume that workers are
similar only when they work for the same
firm. Therefore, we define displaced workers' earnings losses by conditioning only on
general characteristics that would, at date
s - p, be expected to affect earnings at date
t. Nevertheless, we also report estimates
that condition explicitly on workers' firms,
because the difference between the two estimates provides an indirect estimate of the
magnitude of losses imposed by structural
changes on workers who retain their jobs.

variables in the information set Ii _p. To

the extent that we can, we want to control
for the standard demographic variables that
influence earnings. In addition, our data set
allows us to condition on displaced workers'
former industries and even on their former
firms. However, the danger in using a measure that conditions on workers' industries
or firms is that even the workers who retain
their jobs in industries or firms that permanently lay off other workers may themselves
experience some earnings losses. Thus, if we
conditioned on these variables, we might
obtain relatively small displacement-effects
estimates simply because workers who lost
their jobs were hurt only a little more than
those who kept their jobs. For example, if
policy changes cause both displaced and
nondisplaced workers' earnings to decline,
an earnings-loss measure that controls for
workers' industries or firms does not capture the full impact of those changes. Instead it captures only the effects specifically
associated with workers' job losses.

B. The Statistical Model

To estimate the earnings losses corresponding to our definition we specify a statistical model to represent workers' earnings histories and identify the displacement
effect with a subset of the model's parameters. Our specification is intended to exploit
two of the principal strengths of our data
set-that it covers a long period of time- and
that it contains data on many individualsso as to obtain a very detailed picture of the
pattern of earnings losses across both time
and workers.
In order to allow our estimates to vary
across both time and worker characteristics,
we pool information for workers displaced
between 1980 and 1986. A convenient way
to do this is to introduce a series of dummy
variables for the number of quarters before
or after workers' separations. Accordingly,

we let Dik = 1 if, in period t, worker i had
been displaced k quarters earlier (or, if k is
negative, worker i was displaced - k quarters later).14 By restricting attention to these
dummy variables, we formalize the idea that
a worker displaced in 1982 was in much the

12Because our data end after 1986, we have no way
of knowing whether some nondisplaced workers were
displaced in 1987 or beyond. Therefore, our alternative
rules out displacement at date s, and at any time
through 1986.

13In Ruhm (1991), on the other hand, displacement
at a given date is compared to an average that includes
workers displaced at other dates.

14

Alternatively, DJk = 1 if worker i was displaced in

quarter t - k.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 693

same position in 1985 as a worker displaced
in 1981 was in 1984.
Our first statistical specification assumes
that workers' earnings at a given date depend on displacement through the set of
previously defined dummy variables and on
some controls for fixed and time-varying
characteristics:

(2) yit = ai + yt +xitP + E Dkitk + eit.
k2-m

In (2), the dummy variables, Dkt, k=
-im, -(m-1),...,0,1,2,..., jointly represent the event of displacement. In particular, Sk is the effect of displacement on a
worker's earnings k quarters following its
occurrence.15 In the empirical work that
follows, we allow displacement to affect
earnings up to 20 quarters prior to separa-

characteristics are related to their displacement status, our estimates of the displacement effects are unbiased. This estimation
approach generalizes the "difference-indifferences" technique, which uses a comparison group to estimate the earnings
changes that would have occurred in the
absence of displacement, by accounting for
the effects of time-varying variables and by
allowing the effects of displacement to vary
by the number of quarters relative to separation.
As we have noted, many studies have
taken the simple change in earnings between a postdisplacement period and some
base period as an estimate of displaced
workers' losses. In terms of model (2), this

is adequate only if the yv's are constant over

time, 0 is zero, and the base period is

sufficiently far before separation. Ruhm's
(1991) estimates are not constrained in these
ways but differ from ours in the treatment

of unobserved heterogeneity.17 Specifically,
tion. 16 The vector xit consists of the ob-

served, time-varying characteristics of the
worker, which in this article are limited to
the interactions among sex, age, and age

he estimates cross-sectional regression models for postdisplacement earnings in which
workers' predisplacement earnings are used
as a control variable.18 Our approach also
squared. The ye's are the coefficients of a
set of dummy variables for each quarter in
uses predisplacement earnings to control for
the sample period that capture the general
unobserved heterogeneity, but it does so in
the fashion model (2) implies is optimal.
time pattern of earnings in the economy.
The "fixed effect," ai, summarizes the im-As the discussion surrounding Figure 1
indicated, one potential problem with specipact of permanent differences among workers in observed and unobserved characterisfication (2) is that it does not allow for the
possibility that workers might have different
tics. Finally, the error term, ? it is assumed
to have constant variance and to be uncortrend rates of earnings growth and that firms
related across individuals and time.
might be more likely to lay off workers with
We estimate the parameters of (2), inmore slowly growing earnings. This practice
would cause us to overstate the effects of
cluding the fixed effects, by least squares.
Thus, no matter how workers' permanent
displacement. Accordingly, our second specification takes this possibility into account

15Our statistical model is similar to those used to
evaluate the earnings impact of public-sector training

programs (see Orley Ashenfelter, 1978; Heckman and
Richard Robb, 1985; LaLonde, 1986).

17Ruhm's (1991) estimates that include earnings one
year prior to displacement as a control variable will be

16To identify the parameters of (2) we must observe
biased according to (2) unless & _4, ...&. - 1 are all zero.
Analogous reasoning leads him to refer to such estimates as lower bounds.

the earnings of at least some displaced workers more
than m quarters prior to their displacement. The choice
of m = 20 presents us with no problems of identification, because there are six years of predisplacement
data for even our first cohort of displaced workers who

predisplacement earnings of workers who will be displaced in the future that provide the control for unob-

separated from their firms in the first quarter of 1980.

served heterogeneity.

18In one of Ruhm's (1991) specifications, it is the

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

694 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

by adding to (2) a set of "worker-specific

time trends," wqt:19

0, 1,2.... Such estimates follow from a
specification that interacts the quarter dummies with the set of dummy variables denoting workers' 1979 firms. More formally, if

(3) Yit ai + (sit + Yt +Xitp

Yijt denotes the earnings of worker i in 1979

at firm j in quarter t, then

+ E Dit k + Eit
k 2-m

(4) Yijt aij + yjt + D Dtk +Ej
k 2-m

Again, we estimate (3), including the fixed
effects and the worker-specific time trends,
by least squares, thereby allowing for arbitrary permanent heterogeneity between displaced and nondisplaced workers in both
levels and trends of their unobserved characteristics.20
Because we effectively identify the influence of macroeconomic factors, yt, and of

If workers who retain their jobs in firms that
lay off other workers also suffer earnings

losses, then the yjt's for those workers' firms

will decline around the time that those layoffs occur, and as a result, the estimates of
the 8k's based on (4) will be closer to zero.
Moreover, the differences between displace-

age and sex, xito, on earnings by using data ment estimates obtained from (4) and (2)

on all workers who did not separate from
their firms between 1980 and 1986, our
framework essentially compares changes indisplaced workers' earnings to those of the
typical nondisplaced worker. As we noted
above, it is also informative to compare
displaced workers' earnings growth to that
of nondisplaced workers from the same
firms. Of course, we can only make this
comparison for workers who were displaced
from firms that continued to be in existence
throughout the sample period. To compute
this alternative estimator, first we subtracted from the quarterly earnings of each
displaced worker the mean quarterly earnings of nondisplaced workers in their former firms. Then we estimated, by least
squares, a model with individual-specific
fixed effects and the full set of displace-

ment indicators, D k, k = -m, -(mr- ), ...

19In the program-evaluation literature this specification has fit the earnings data of program and non-

program participants more successfully than the simpler fixed-effects specification (see Ashenfelter and
David Card, 1985; Heckman and Hotz, 1989).
20Computationally this is accomplished by a generalization of the "deviations from worker-specific mean"
technique, in which we replace the time dummies, the
x's, and the displacement dummies by deviations from
person-specific time trends in these variables and then
estimate the resulting model by least squares.

serve to gauge the size of losses suffered by
workers who do not lose their jobs.
The foregoing models describe the temporal pattern of displaced workers' earnings
losses in a very flexible manner. In principle, they can be easily modified to summarize how this pattern varies among different
groups of workers. The least restrictive
modification interacts each displacement

dummy variable, Dik, with variables indicat-

ing workers' gender, age, industry, or region. The problem with this approach is
that it leads to a very large number of
parameters. For example, because there are
48 pre- and postdisplacement time periods
observed in the data, to characterize the
earnings losses across 12 industires in the

most flexible manner requires nearly 600
displacement parameters. Fortunately, after
examining such estimates it became apparent that differences among groups in the
time pattern of earnings losses occurred
mainly along just three dimensions: the rate
at which earnings "dip" in the period before separation, the size of the "drop" that
occurs at the time of separation, and the
rate of "recovery" in the period following
separation.
We use the fact that differences in the
losses among groups can be summarized by
three magnitudes to construct a more parsimonious representation of losses across time

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 695

and workers. Specifically we define:

cation (5) as

Fil = t - (s - 13), if worker i is displaced at
(5 ) yi, ai + yt +xitO + D kikt Sk

time s and s-12<t<s, and Fil=Ooth-

k >-m

erwise;

Fi 2 = 1, if worker t is displaced at time s
and t > s + 1 and F.=O otherwise;

Ft= t - (s + 6), if worker i is displaced at
time s and t 2 s+7, and FJOt other-

+ E (Filf
lj + F2 + 3
i~~~~
+ Eit

wise.

where EiJ is an indicator variable for

Then, if ci is a vector of characteristics ofwhether worker i is a member of group j
individual i, our parsimonious model takes
and 'plj, P2]X and 'ps give the relative size
the form

(5) yit = ai + yt +x

+ E D8tak + FitCiYl
k >-m

of the dip, drop, and recovery for group j.
If the second sum in (5') extends over all
possible levels of a categorical variable, then
the model will not be of full rank. However,
instead of dropping the first dummy variable, which would be equivalent to setting

+ FiCp2- + FitCip3 + sit p1 = 0 for 1' = 1,2,3, we impose the restrictions that E'pfjfj = 0 for 6 = 1, 2,3, where fj

is the fraction
of all
where YPl P2, and p3, are parameter
vec-

tors giving the effect of workers' characeristics on the dip, the drop, and the recovery,
respectively. To implement our parsimonious representation we include the full set
of displacement dummies but only allow for
interactions between worker characteristics

displaced workers who
are in group j. Alternatively, when worker
characteristics are continuous rather than
categorical variables, we subtract the variables' means over all displaced workers from
their levels before forming the interaction

terms in (5). The advantage of these param-

eterizations is that the average loss for all
and the three variables Fil, FJ, and F3.

Specification (5) forces the gap between the
estimated losses of two workers (i) to be
zero in the period more than three years
prior to separation, (ii) to grow or decline
linearly during the period from three years
before separation until the quarter of separation, (iii) to be constant during the period
from one to six quarters after displacement,
and (iv) to grow or decline linearly from its
value six quarters after separation until the
end of the sample period. Accordingly, the
losses k quarters after separation for a
worker with characteristics c1, take the following form:

Sk if k < - 13
k + ci4pl(k + 13) if-12<k<O

3k+Ci4P2 if l<k<6
3k +CiP2 +ciP3(k -6) if k > 7.
In cases in which worker characteristics are

categorical variables, we can write specifi-

displaced workers for the kth quarter after

separation simply equals 8k* Moreover, S0jj,
(P2j, and 'p3j express the difference between

the jth group's dip, drop, and recovery and
those of the average displaced worker.

Below, we implement versions of (5) that
simultaneously include interactions for
workers' gender, age, industry, firm size,
and local labor-market conditions. Such estimates show how earnings losses depend
on these factors, controlling for other factors that affect the pattern of losses. For
example, we present estimates of how the
temporal pattern of earnings losses differs
between men and women, after controlling
for any differences in their ages, industries,
firm sizes, and local labor-market conditions.
C. Potential Biases
The foregoing statistical framework addresses several sources of bias that have

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

696 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

before separation. Therefore, because the
spurious and true effects of displacement
are of the same sign, it follows that during
this period both are close to zero and thus
that during the period more than three years
after separation the spurious effects of displacement are zero. Alternatively, given the
assumptioin of stationarity, the evidence on
earnings losses before separation shows that
by three years after separation the error will
have completely "regressed to the mean,"
implying little or no bias in estimates of
long-term displacement effects.
The above argument fails when the error
process is nonstationary. In this case, when
modeled by assuming that firms selectively
firms discharge recent poor performers, the
lay off workers for whom the error term
mean of 5it conditional on displacement
associated with the layoff date, Eis' is low.
will not generally regress back to zero. ConThe importance of any resulting biases
depends critically on the time-series propersequently, even our long-term loss estimates
ties of the error terms. For example, when
may be biased. However, we can substantially lessen the importance of this selectivthose errors are independent across time as
ity bias by restricting our analysis to workers
we assumed above, such behavior biases
who
separate from firms that close all or a
only estimates of 80, the displacement
eflarge part of their operations. Such workers
fect associated with workers' dates of sepaare unlikely to have left their jobs as a
ration. Unfortunately, when the errors are
result of their own poor performance.
correlated over time, estimates of other disTherefore, in the empirical work that folplacement coefficients are likely to be bilows we give greater weight to the estimated
ased. The program-evaluation literature
earnings losses of workers in our mass-layoff
sometimes accounts for this source of bias
sample.
by explicitly modeling the selection process
and simultaneously estimating its parameIII. Empirical Findings
ters along with those of the earnings equa-

plagued many previous studies. In particular, it is worth noting that no biases arise in
the least-squares estimation of (2) if firms
choose whom to layoff partly on the basis of
the permanent characteristics embodied in
workers' fixed effects. Similarly, leastsquares estimation of (3) is unbiased even if
firms tend to lay off workers partially on the
basis of worker-specific fixed effects or time
trends. However, our estimates are biased if
firms selectively lay off employees whose
performance was unusually poor in the
quarters around the time of separation. In
terms of our models, such behavior could be

tion (see e.g., Ashenfelter and Card, 1985;
Card and Sullivan, 1988).
We have chosen not to estimate such a
model because, for most commonly adopted
specifications, doing so would have little or
no impact on our estimates of long-run displacement effects. For example, if we assume that the error process for each individual is stationary, the spurious effects of
displacement are symmetric about the date

of separation.2' We show below that the
estimated effects of displacement are close
to zero for periods more than three years

The model developed in the previous section defines displaced workers' earnings
losses as the difference between their quarterly earnings and their expected earnings
had they remained with their former employer. We report estimates of that difference below for each quarter beginning with
the 20th quarter prior to their separations
and ending with the 27th quarter after their
separations. To facilitate the exposition, we
plot these estimated effects against the
number of quarters before or after workers'
separations.

A. Earnings Losses and Mass Layoffs
21See Heckman and Robb (1985) for a similar argument supporting the use of a symmetric differencein-differences estimator in the estimation of earnings
impacts of training programs.

As shown by Figure 2, we find that hightenure, prime-age workers endure substantial and persistent earnings losses when they

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 697

-500

-15000

0.0
E -2000

-2500 -

-3000

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Years

2

3

4

Since

5

6

Displacem

+ Without Trends + With Trends
FIGURE 2. EARNINGS LOSSES FOR SEPARATORS IN MASS-LAYOFF SAMPLE

are displaced during or following mass layoffs. Even six years after their separations,
their quarterly earnings remain $1,600 below their expected levels.22 This loss represents 25 percent of their predisplacement
earnings. Moreover, because the estimated
loss is even larger when we control for
worker-specific time trends, these estimates
do not result from employers systematically
displacing workers with more slowly growing
earnings. Further, because the estimated
losses do not decline significantly after the
third year following their separations, there
is little evidence that displaced workers'
earnings will ever return to their expected
levels.23

We also find evidence that the events that
lead to workers' separations cause their
earnings to depart from their expected levels even before they leave their firms.24 As
shown by Figure 2, these workers' quarterly
earnings begin to diverge meaningfully from
their expected levels approximately three
years prior to separtion. That divergence
accelerates during the quarters immediately
prior to separation, so that by the quarter
prior to displacement, these workers' earnings are approximately $1,000 below their
expected levels. Although we cannot determine from our data whether these preseparation declines result from cuts in real wages
or weekly hours, in other work we find that
the incidence of temporary layoffs increased

22Although not shown, the quarterly employment
rates of the displaced workers in our sample depart
only slightly from their expected levels, except for the
year following separation. This behavior for displaced
workers' employment rates is not surprising, because
our sample excludes workers with extremely long spells
without wage and salary earnings. Thus, the substantial
earnings losses observed in Figure 2 are largely due to
lower earnings for those who work, rather than an
increase in the number of workers without quarterly
earnings.

23Because our sample is large, the estimated standard errors are relatively small. For example, between

the fifth year prior to workers' separations and the
second quarter after their job losses the standard errors associated with the displacement effects average
$30 per quarter. After that quarter, the standard errors
increase, so that by the 20th quarter following the
separations the standard errors are approximately $60.

24Ruhm (1991 p. 322; using the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics), David Blanchflower (1991 p. 489;
using data from Great Britain), and Sara Di la Rica
(1992; using the DWS) each report that displaced
workers' earnings declined prior to separation.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

698 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993
1000

0

0 -500
0)

-1000

-1500

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Years

2

3

4

Since

5

6

Displacem

+ Without Trends * With Trends
FIGURE 3. EARNINGS LOSSES FOR SEPARATORS IN NON-MASS-LAYOFF SAMPLE

0-

-500

-15000W
?-2W0
~e
- -1500-

A

O1

-2000

l
L

-3500

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

Years

1

2

3

Since

4

5

6

Displaceme

E3 Model (4) E3 Model (2)
FIGURE 4. SENSITIVITY OF EARNINGS-LOSS ESTIMATES FOR MASS-LAYOFF SAMPLE TO DIFFERENT
COMPARISON GROUPS

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 699

for these workers before their final separations (see Jacobson et al., 1993).
Our confidence in these results-that
earnings losses are large and long-term and
that they appear even before workers per-

manently lose their jobs-is enhanced because we do not find substantial estimated
losses during the period 4-5 years before
separation. Many forms of model misspecification would generate estimated "displacement effects" arbitrarily long before
job loss. Instead, we find that estimated
losses are small for time periods more than
three years before separation. To explore
this issue further, we relaxed the assumption of no displacement effects more than
five years before separation by setting m in
equation (2) equal to values of up to 10
years. In no case did we observe evidence of
a meaningful displacement effect more than
three years before workers' actual separations.

A different earnings-loss pattern emerges
for workers from the non-mass-layoff sample. First, as shown by Figure 3, depending
on which model we used to estimate the
losses, this group's earnings fully recover
3-5 years following their separations. Second, prior to separations, their earnings depart only slightly from their expected levels,
and following separation they drop by only
one-half as much as workers in the masslayoff sample. This pattern of earnings losses
for the non-mass-layoff sample is not surprising, because this sample probably includes larger fractions of workers who quit
their jobs or who had fewer firm-specific
skills. Indeed, this pattern of losses for
workers who are likely to adjust easily to
separation enhances our confidence in our
previous result that workers displaced during mass layoffs experience large earnings
losses. The comparative ease of adjustment
of workers in the non-mass-layoff sample
demonstrates that there is nothing in our
specification that necessarily generates large
loss estimates.

The foregoing findings demonstrate that
when estimating the effects of displacement
it is important to have long time-series on
workers' earnings histories as well as information about their firms. Studies that use

data lacking these features, such as the
DWS, have likely underestimated the earnings losses associated with worker displacement. For example, as shown by Figure 2,
displaced workers' earnings are abnormally
low in the year prior to separation. As a
result, if we had only one year of preseparation earnings data, our earnings-loss estimates would have been nearly 50-percent
smaller than the estimate based on workers'
long-term earnings histories. Likewise, we
might have underestimated workers' earnings losses if we had to rely on displaced
workers' assessments of their firms' economic well-being rather than the firms' administrative records. As indicated by Figure
3, if workers who separated from "normal"
firms report that they were laid off from
distressed firms, researchers would under-

state the long-term losses associated with
displacement.

B. Sensitivity of Losses to Comparison
Group

In the foregoing analysis, high-tenure
workers who remained with their firms for
the entire sample period identified the in-

fluence of macroeconomic factors, Vt, and

of age and sex, xit3, on earnings. As we
previously observed, it is also of interest to
compare displaced workers' earnings to
those of nondisplaced workers in the same
firm. The estimated earnings losses based
on this alternative estimator should be
smaller as long as nondisplaced workers in
distressed firms have earnings that grow
more slowly than those of other nondisplaced workers. Such a finding would suggest that nondisplaced workers' earnings are
adversely affected by the events that lead to
mass layoffs in their industry or firm.
As shown by Figure 4, when we use the
nondisplaced workers in displaced workers'
former firms to identify the influence of
macroeconomic factors, the estimated earnings losses are smaller by about 20 percent.
For example, five years after separation,
displaced workers' quarterly earnings are

$1,200 below (compared to $1,500 below)
their expected levels when we use all
nondisplaced workers to identify the influ-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

700 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

500 -

0-o
-500

-

0 10
Cu

-15000

co -15000-

CD

-2500-

-3000 -3500 - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years Since Displacement

i Model (4) F3 Model (2)
FIGURE 5. SENSITIVITY OF EARNINGS-LOSS ESTIMATES FOR NON-MASS-LAYOFF SAMPLE TO DIFFERENT
COMPARISON GROUPS

ence of macroeconomic factors.25 The gap
between these two sets of estimates indicates that employees who remain employed
during mass layoffs experience only modest
declines in earnings relative to other
nondisplaced workers.
It is also apparent from Figure 4 that,
because the gap between the two sets of
estimates becomes large only after separation, nondisplaced workers in distressed
firms fall behind other nondisplaced workers only after their firms lay off large numbers of workers. Before the mass layoffs, the
displaced workers' earnings fall substantially relative to either comparison group of
nondisplaced workers. This implies that
when firms seem likely to reduce their
workforces dramatically, it is probably apparent which employees are most likely to
be permanently laid off, namely, those who

25The two sets of estimates in Figure 4 are based on

the fixed-effects estimator described in equation (4).
The sample of displaced workers used in Figure 4
differs from that used in Figure 2, because there is no
corresponding comparison group for workers displaced
during plant closings. Accordingly, in Figure 4 we use
only workers displaced during mass layoffs when the
firm continued its operations.

have experienced temporary layoffs in the
past. This result suggests that stayers in
distressed firms may not accept significant
cuts in their own earnings because they do
not consider themselves at risk for job loss.
Turning to the non-mass-layoff sample,
we find that our earnings-loss estimates do
not depend on the comparison group. As
shown in Figure 5, the estimated earnings
losses are the same whether or not we condition on a displaced worker's firm. This
finding is not surprising, for when few employees separate from their firms it is unlikely that those separations would be associated with earnings losses for those who
remain employed at the firm.

C. Eamings Losses by Worker Group
The findings reported above indicate that,
on average, workers separating from firms
during mass layoffs experience large longterm earnings losses. To determine how the
pattern of these losses varies by worker
characteristics, we use our mass-layoff sample to estimate several versions of model

(5). That model allows workers' earningsloss patterns to differ from the average pat-

tern shown in Figure 2 in (i) their rates of

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 701

earnings decline during the 12 quarters prior
to their job losses (their dip), (ii) their average quarterly earnings loss during the first
six postseparation quarters (their drop), and
(iii) their rate of earnings recovery after the
sixth quarter following their separtions (their
recovery).26 In Table 2, we report estimates
of these differences corresponding to differences in sex, decade of birth, industry,
firm size, and local labor-market conditions.
In addition, as a summary measure of
groups' long-term losses, we report estimates of their losses during the fifth year
following displacement. The set of columns
on the left, labeled "without other controls,"
contains estimates of model (5) in which
only one group of interactions is included in
the model, while the set of columns on the
right, labeled "with other controls," contains estimates of model (5) in which all
interactions are included simultaneously.
To interpret the estimates in Table 2,
consider the estimated differences between
the patterns of men's and women's losses
when no other interactions are included in
the model. The dip coefficients reveal that
men's and women's predisplacement earn-

ings losses were, respectively, $10.8 per
quarter more and $36.7 per quarter less
than the average rate of decline depicted in
Figure 2 (of approximately $83.3 per quarter). The difference between these two figures indicates that, during the preseparation period, men's earnings declined by
$47.5 per quarter more than did earnings of
their female counterparts. Thus, by the
quarter of separation, the gap between
men's and women's earnings losses was $618
(or 47.5 multiplied by 13, the value of the
dip time trend on the date of separation).
Immediately after separation, the drop coefficients indicate that men's and women's
quarterly earnings losses were, respectively,
$217 more and $738 less than the average
loss depicted in Figure 2 (of approximately
$2,219). Thus, we estimate that men's
short-term earnings losses were $955 per

quarter more than women's losses. However, after this initial postdisplacement period, men's earnings rebound somewhat rel-

ative to women's earnings. The difference
between their recovery coefficients indicates
that their earnings rise $28.5 (6.5 - 22.0) per
quarter faster than women's earnings. Nevertheless, during the fifth year after displacement, their earnings losses exceed

women's by $2,398 (- 545 - 1,853). Given
the average level of losses, this estimate
implies that during the fifth year after displacement men's losses amounted to $7,143,
and women's losses amounted to $4,744.27
The difference observed above between
men's and women's losses nearly disappears
when we hold constant the distribution of
workers' ages, industries, and firm sizes as
well as local labor-market conditions at the
time of their displacements. As shown by
the second group of columns in Table 2, the
difference between men's and women's rates
of preseparation declines falls to only $15
per quarter, and the difference between
their initial postdisplacement losses falls to
$453 per quarter. The latter figure suggests
that the women in our sample had somewhat fewer firm-specific skills or were less
likely to have been receiving wage premiums on their old jobs. Finally, holding constant other factors, in the period more than
six quarters after separation, women are
estimated to recover $20 per quarter more
slowly than men. This result suggests that,
other factors held constant, women are less
likely to acquire new skills after their job
losses.
What is most notable about the results
for workers from different birth cohorts is

27The estimates in the columns labeled "fifth year
loss dif' are equal to four times the drop estimate plus

50 times the recovery estimate. The coefficient on the
drop estimate is four because the drop estimate applies
to each of the four quarters in the fifth year after
displacement. The coefficient on the recovery coefficient is 50 because that is the sum of the values (11, 12,

13, and 14) that the recovery time trend takes on
26The overall loss estimates obtained by estimating
(5) for various sets of worker characteristics are quite
similar to those plotted in Figure 2 and are therefore

during the fifth year after displacement. The estimates
labeled "fifth year loss" are equal to those labeled
"fifth year loss dif' plus the average loss during the
fifth year after displacement, which in terms of model

not shown.

(5) is 817 + '?8 + '19 + 8202

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

702 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

TABLE 2-LOSSES BY WORKER CHARACTERISTICS

Without other controlsa With other controlsb
Fifth-

Fifth-

Fifth-

Fifth-

year

year

year

year

Group Number Dipc Dropd Recoverye loss dif loss Dip Drop Recovery loss dif loss
Overall

6,435

-83.3

-2,179

15.4 - -6,611
(2.2) (16) (4.4) (150)

Sex:

Male 4,972 -10.8 -217 6.5 -545 -7,143 -3.4 -103 4.7 -177 -6,788

(0.7) (7) (0.9) (40) (132) (0.7) (7) (0.9) (43) (157)
Female 1,463 36.7 738 -22.0 1,853 -4,744 11.6 350 -16.0 602 -6,009
(2.2) (24) (3.0) (136) (184) (2.3) (25) (3.2) (145) (207)
Decade of birth:

1930's 2,599 -0.0 116 -10.9 -79 -6,677 -0.3 55 -10.1 -284 -6,896
(1.4) (16) (2.0) (92) (159) (1.4) (16) (2.1) (94) (182)
1940's 2,584 7.2 3 4.6 241 - 6,356 3.6 - 28 5.6 171 - 6,440
(1.4) (15) (2.0) (87) (151) (1.4) (15) (2.0) (88) (172)
1950's 1,252 -14.9 - 247 13.1 - 333 - 6,932 -6.9 - 58 9.4 238 - 6,374

(2.4) (25) (3.2) (144) (188) (2.4) (25) (3.2) (145) (203)
Industry:

Mining and 247 1.3 -497 7.5 -1,616 -8,435 9.5 -387 -0.1 -1,549 -8,160

construction (5.6) (58) (7.6) (332) (352) (5.8) (59) (7.8) (339) (369)
Nondurable 1,206 26.5 624 -14.6 1,766 -5,052 18.3 338 -7.7 967 -5,644

manufacturing (2.3) (25) (3.3) (144) (188) (2.6) (28) (3.7) (160) (224)
Primary 1,354 -121.2 -1,991 54.1 -5,256 -12,074 -104.5 -1,476 40.5 -3,878 -10,489

metals (2.2) (24) (3.6) (157) (210) (2.7) (30) (4.4) (191) (241)
Fabricated 436 21.0 611 -11.2 1,882 -4,936 15.9 488 -9.8 1,465 -5,146

metals (4.2) (44) (6.4) (274) (301) (4.2) (45) (6.5) (279) (312)
Nonelectrical 632 47.9 1,005 -36.9 2,174 -4,644 35 797 -27.4 1,817 -4,794

machinery (3.4) (38) (5.8) (249) (284) (3.5) (39) (5.9) (257) (306)
Electrical 421 43.2 288 7.0 1,500 -5,318 49.5 494 -2.7 1,842 -4,769

machinery (4.2) (46) (6.1) (270) (300) (4.3) (47) (6.4) (282) (322)
Transportation 419 25.0 422 -27.5 310 -6,508 14.1 215 -15.5 85 -6,526

equipment (4.3) (46) (6.2) (264) (291) (4.4) (48) (6.6) (282) (324)
Other durable 441 25.6 525 3.0 2,248 -4,570 18.9 338 9.1 1,807 -4,804

manufacturing (4.2) (43) (5.5) (237) (262) (4.2) (43) (5.7) (242) (282)
Transportation, 348 6.6 150 - 63.5 -2,573 - 9,392 5.5 66 - 63.6 -2,916 - 9,527
communication, (4.7) (49) (7.0) (295) (321) (4.8) (50) (7.1) (301) (333)
and public utilities
Wholesale and 545 18.7 198 2.0 891 -5,927 20.0 126 4.8 745 -5,866

retail trade (3.7) (38) (4.8) (207) (235) (3.8) (38) (4.9) (211) (251)
Finance, 183 127.7 1,312 14.3 5,963 -855 115.7 947 24.3 5,004 -1,608
insurance, (6.6) (70) (8.2) (352) (369) (6.7) (72) (8.3) (358) (387)
and real estate

Professional, 203 82.0 1,158 -18.2 3,725 -3,093 93.1 1,270 -26.2 3,769 -2,843
business, and (6.3) (63) (8.4) (360) (378) (6.4) (64) (8.7) (369) (394)
entertainment
services

Firm size:
50-500 1,704 7.9 351 0.6 1,434 -5,403 - 16.1 -37 13.0 501 -6,110
(1.9) (20) (2.6) (113) (163) (2.1) (22) (2.9) (124) (193)
501-2,000 1,497 33.5 501 -14.1 1,298 -5,540 13.9 214 - 4.7 625 - 5,986

(2.0) (22) (2.9) (127) (176) (2.2) (23) (3.1) (135) (246)
2,001-5,000 1,381 40.9 720 -32.3 1,267 -5,570 27.2 480 - 23.8 730 - 5,881

(2.2) (23) (3.1) (134) (179) (2.3) (24) (3.5) (149) (203)
Greater than 1,853 -64.8 -1,265 34.9 -3,312 -10.150 -16.7 -497 9.6 -1,510 -8,121

5,000 (1.8) (19) (2.9) (125) (190) (2.3) (25) (3.6) (154) (224)

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 703

TABLE 2- Continued.
Without other controlsa With other controlsb
Fifth-

Fifth-

Fifth-

Fifth-

year

year

year

year

Group Number Dipc Dropd Recoverye loss dif loss Dip Drop Recovery loss dif loss
Local labor market:
Employment 129.2 2,391 - 73.2 5,903 38.8 743 18.1 2,069

(7.5)

(84)

Employment

trend

79.9

deviation

(6.4)

(10.9)
900

(64)

(485)

-50.3
(9.3)

(7.9)

1,082

(401)

(87)

51.8

(6.4)

(11.7)

376
(65)

(520)

-40.9

-540

(9.4)

(408)

Unemployment 41.5 213 -29.7 -635 1.2 -555 1.3 -2,153

rate

(8.9)

(97)

(14.3)

(631)

(9.0)

(98)

(14.6)

(643)

Notes: "Dip," "drop," "recovery," and "fifth year loss diff" columns give groups' deviations from the mean of the variable
for all displaced workers given in the first row of the table. See text for full explanations of entries. Numbers in parentheses
are standard errors.
aEstimates derived from models that include interactions with exactly one of sex, birth cohort, industry, firm size, or local
labor-market interactions.

bModel includes all interactions with sex, birth cohort, industry, firm size, and local labor market.
CCoefficient on predisplacement time trend.
dCoefficient on dummy for first six quarters after displacement.
eCoefficient on postseparation time trend.

that the differences between these groups'
patterns of losses are generally very small.
Younger workers have a somewhat greater
rate of decline in the period before separation, probably reflecting a greater vulnerability to temporary layoffs due to lower levels of seniority, but the difference is barely
statistically significant. Younger workers
also have a larger drop in earnings in the
period after displacement, but when other
controls are included, the gap in quarterly
losses between workers born in the 1930's
and those born in the 1950's is estimated to
be only $113. The larger initial losses suffered by younger workers are quickly canceled by their faster rate of recovery. During the period more than six quarters after
separation, the youngest group of workers
have earnings that recover $19.4 per quarter
faster than those of the oldest workers. As a
result, in the fifth year after separation, the
oldest workers lose $521 more than the
youngest workers. The finding of more
slowly growing earnings of older workers is
consistent with their facing a shorter time
horizon and thus being less likely to acquire
new skills.
Our results on how losses vary with the
characteristics of displaced workers' former
firms indicate that workers' earnings losses

are substantial across a broad range of industries and firm sizes. The pattern of losses
for workers displaced from industries as diverse as nondurable manufacturing, motor
vehicles, and wholesale and retail trade
closely resembles the pattern depicted in
Figure 2. Likewise, the pattern of losses for
workers displaced from smaller firms, with
between 50 and 500 employees, is similar to
the pattern for workers displaced from
larger firms, with between 2,000 and 5,000
employees.
Although workers experience large losses
regardless of their industry or firm size,
these characteristics are nevertheless important determinants of the magnitude of their
losses. The differences in the magnitude of
losses across both industries and firm sizes
suggest that the loss of rents, including union
premiums, may contribute to workers' earnings losses. Losses were especially large,
both prior to and after displacement, among
workers separating from the heavily unionized mining and construction, primary metals, and transportation, communications,
and public-utility sectors. Consistent with
this evidence on the potential loss of rents,
we also find much larger losses among
workers displaced from very large firms. By
contrast, losses were relatively small among

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

704 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

workers displaced from the largely nonunion
business and professional service and financial sectors.
To assess the importance of labor-market
conditions on workers' losses, we included
in c1 in equation (5) variables that summarize both their locales' long-term economic
conditions and business-cycle conditions at
the time of their job losses.28 We summarize the locale's long-term labor-market
conditions by its trend in nonagricultural
employment. We summarize the effect of
the locale's cyclical conditions on the date
of workers' separations with two variables:

(i) the locale's unemployment rate and
(ii) the deviation of the locale's employment

level from its trend.29 Because the coefficients of these labor-market variables are
difficult to interpret, Table 2 presents estimates of differences between earnings losses
for those displaced amidst what were approximately the best and worst conditions
observed in the data. The range of quarterly
employment growth rates among Pennsylvania locales was approximately 0.01, corresponding to the difference between these
rates in its strongest labor market, Lancaster, and its weakest labor market, Johnstown. The range of unemployment rates
and employment deviations are both approximately 0.1, corresponding to a 10percentage-point difference in these variables between the peak and the trough of
the business cycle.
Our findings show that workers' losses
increase when the workers are displaced in
regions that have depressed rates of employment growth. In the quarter prior to

separations and is still $500 per quarter five
years after their separations. This long-term
differential between the losses suffered in
the strongest and weakest labor markets
corresponds to about one-third of the average loss depicted in Figure 2.
The figures in Table 2 also indicate that
cyclical conditions at the time of workers'
job losses have substantial and long-lasting
effects on their earnings. By themselves,
neither unemployment rates nor employment deviations adequately capture the impact of a locale's cyclical conditions on the
pattern of workers' losses. The results indicate that differences in locales' unemployment rates correspond to differences in
postseparation earnings declines but are not
correlated with the rate of predisplacement
earnings decline or the rate of postdisplacement earnings recovery. The impact of cyclical conditions on these terms is better
captured by variation in local employment

deviations at the time of job loss. Together,
the two measures indicate that locales'
cyclical conditions affect the magnitude of
both workers' pre- and postdisplacement
losses. Moreover, severe cyclical conditions
have an enduring impact on workers' earnings. The figures in Table 2 indicate that
workers displaced during particularly adverse cyclical conditions have losses after

five years that are nearly $1,500 larger than
those experienced by workers displaced during the best cyclical conditions.
Like industry and firm size, local labormarket conditions are important determinants of earnings losses. It is important to
recognize, however, that even workers displaced in strong labor markets experience
their separations, workers displaced in the
weakest labor markets have losses that are
large losses. Our figures indicate that workmore than $500 (13 x 38.8) larger than thoseers displaced in the best of circumstances
experienced by workers displaced in the
have losses that are at most only one-third
strongest markets. The gap between workless severe than the average losses depicted
in Figure 2.30 This finding suggests that
ers' losses widens to approximately $750 per
quarter during the first year following their
some valuable attribute of the employment
relationship itself is lost when high-tenure
workers are displaced.

28For details on the local labor-market variables see
the Appendix.
29

7As we noted in Section II-B, to construct the

30We have obtained similar estimates of the imporvariables entering ci, we subtracted these three continuous variables' means, taken over all displaced work-

tance of local labor markets in models that include

ers, from their levels for each worker.

regional dummies in the list of variables in ci.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 705

D. Losses and Sector of New Jobs

TABLE 3-EARNINGS LOSSES BY SECTOR OF NEW JOB:

DEVIATION BETWEEN ACTUAL AND
EXPECTED QUARTERLY EARNINGS

To explore further this possibility we ex-

amined the relationship between workers'
losses and the industrial sector of their new
jobs.31 If the skills required on two jobs are
more similar when the jobs are in the same
industry and if the loss of specialized skills
is an important determinant of workers'
losses, displaced workers returning to the
same industry should experience smaller
earnings declines than those whose new jobs
lie outside their old industry. Accordingly,
we examined the earnings losses of workers

New job in same sector
Quarters Same Different New job

since four-digit four-digit in other
separation SIC SIC sector
A. Displaced Manufacturing Workers:

-

8

-$379

-

$117

(82)

[-7]

-

$237

(67)

(73)

[-2]

[-4]

12 -1,044 -1,117 - 2,616
(82) (67) (73)
[-19] [- 21] [-44]

whose new jobs were (i) in the same four24 -1,103 - 958 - 2,221
digit SIC industry as their old job, (ii) in the
(197) (137) (150)
[- 20] [-18] [-38]
same sector (manufacturing or nonmanufacturing) but in a different four-digit industry,
B. Displaced Nonmanufacturing Workers:
or (iii) in a different sector.
- 8 - 229 -26 -151
Manufacturing workers' earnings losses
(132) (128) (231)
depend crucially on whether they obtain
[ -4] [0] [ -3]
new jobs in the manufacturing sector. As
12 - 1,129 - 1,305 - 1,498
shown by Table 3, the losses of those who
(132) (128) (231)
leave the manufacturing sector equal 38
[-18] [-23] [-26]
percent of their predisplacement earnings.32
24 - 1,103 - 1,276 - 1,949
However, for those who found new jobs in
(315) (241) (476)
the manufacturing sector it does not appear
[-18] [-22] [-33]
to matter whether they found a job in their
Notes: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.
old four-digit industry. As shown in panel
Numbers in square brackets express the estimated
A, 24 quarters after their separations worklosses as a percentage of predisplacement earnings.
ers' losses were 20 percent of predisplacement earnings if they found new jobs in the
percent if they found new manufacturing
same four-digit industry, compared with 18
jobs in different four-digit industries.
The findings for displaced nonmanufacturing workers are similar to those for their
manufacturing counterparts. The long-term
earnings losses for those who find new jobs
31In keeping with this study's focus on displacein
the same four-digit industry amount to 18
ment's long-term impact, we want to assess the relationship between earnings losses and the industry of
percent. That percentage rises to 22 percent
workers' new jobs several years following separation.
when their new jobs are in different fourFor workers displaced in 1985 and 1986 such an assessdigit industries but still in the same sector.
ment is impossible because we have only a few quarters
Finally, those losses are larger for those
of postseparation data. Accordingly, we examined the
who found new jobs in the manufacturing
relationship between earnings losses and new job's
industry for workers displaced from distressed firms
sector, though the standard error associated
between 1980 and 1983. The new job's industry was the
with that estimate is relatively large, as few
workers' primary employer in 1986, which was 3-6
displaced nonmanufacturing workers found
years following displacement.
jobs in manufacturing. Nevertheless, the
32This finding showing greater losses when displaced workers switch sectors does not result because
findings for both displaced manufacturing
workers with jobs in the nonmanufacturing sector have
and nonmanufacturing workers indicate that
been displaced for a shorter period of time. The mean
a substantial portion of their earnings losses
quarter of separation for those who switch sectors is
result from the loss of some highly firmthe same as for those who remain in the manufacturing
specific component of earnings. Even those
sector.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

706 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REV7EW SEPTEMBER 1993

who found new employment in the same
industry experienced large and persistent
losses.
IV. Conclusion

Consistent with previous research using
other data sets, we have shown that hightenure workers experience substantial earnings losses when they leave their jobs. In
addition, we have shown that, for workers
displaced from distressed firms, these losses
(i) are long-term, with little evidence of
substantial recovery after the third year; (ii)
arise even prior to workers' separations; (iii)
vary modestly with local labor-market conditions, industry, and firm size; (iv) do not
depend very much on workers' gender and
age; and (v) are substantial even for those
who find new jobs in similar firms.
The significance of these results is heightened by the large number of workers adversely affected by structural change during
the first half of the 1980's. Because we
employed a 5-percent sample of Pennsylvania workers, we estimate that approximately
135,000 of that state's high-tenure workers
were permanently laid off from distressed
firms. Further, because approximately 5
percent of U.S. workers are employed in
Pennsylvania, if the rest of the nation experienced similar rates of displacement, our
results represent the experiences of 2.6 million workers nationwide. This estimate
agrees closely with the number of hightenure prime-age displaced workers reported by the DWS during approximately
the same period.33
Our findings also bear on the importance
of several alternative theories of why job
losses should be costly. First, losses are
larger in settings where unions or rent-shar-

33To obtain the latter number, we applied the same
tenure and age restrictions used in our study to the
1984 and 1986 DWS's. We counted persons who were
displaced from full-time private nonagricultural jobs,
but we excluded persons who reported that they had
been self-employed or were displaced for unspecified

reasons. Like our sample, the resulting DWS sample
covered a seven-year period, but it began in 1979
instead of 1980.

ing are likely to be prevalent. Second, longterm losses depend modestly on businesscycle conditions at the time of workers' job
losses. This result is consistent with implicitcontracting models of wage determination
(see Paul Beaudry and John DiNardo,
1991). Third, the relatively slow rates of
earnings recovery after workers secure new
jobs suggests that wage gains generated from
idiosyncratic job-matching must accrue
slowly over time. Finally, our results indicate that there is something intrinsic to the
employment relationship itself that is lost
when workers are displaced. If it is workers'
skills that are lost, these skills must be
firm-specific, as opposed to industry-specific.
Alternatively, such earnings losses may result from the workings of internal labor
markets. Although we cannot assess the relative importance of these two alternatives,
our finding that losses are large for almost
every group we studied suggests that wage
premiums-whether due to firm-specific
skills or to internal labor markets-must be
commonplace.
APPENDIX

A. Constructing the Data
We constructed our longitudinal data
from a 5-percent sample of workers included in Pennsylvania Unemployment In-

surance (UI) tax reports and the state ES202
data on firms' employment. The firms' UI
tax records report the quarterly wage and
salary earnings for each employee. Because
the state requires accurate and timely information to calculate unemploymentinsurance taxes and workers' benefits, it
cross-checks these earnings records against
earlier reports and federal corporate tax
returns. In these data, employers report
their employees' total earnings; unlike Social Security earnings data, these data are
not top-coded. For a portion of the sample,
the UI tax records also identify workers'
sex, age, and race, data that the state obtained from the Social Security Administration in 1976. Unfortunately, even for workers who were in the Pennsylvania labor force
in 1976, this information is sometimes missing.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 707

The ES202 reports provide the information about firms' employment that the Bureau of Labor Statistics uses to compile its
reports on employment and earnings. A key
element of our analysis is that we use the
information on the sources of workers'
earnings to track accurately their separations from individual firms. Thus, it is important to account for cases in which a
firm's employer identification number (EIN)
changes from one period to the next, creating the appearance of a closing followed by
an opening of a new firm. Fortunately, the
Pennsylvania ES202 data include files detailing EIN changes which we were able to
use to construct a consistent set of corrected EIN's. In several years, well over 5
percent of total employment was affected by
EIN changes. Indeed, had we not eliminated bogus changes, such changes would
be the primary source of movement of
workers between employers with the same
four-digit SIC but different EIN's. In cases
of mergers and divestitures that occurred
during the sample period, we treated the
separate parts as a single firm, even in years
when they were legally distinct.
Finally, we created our longitudinal file
by merging UI tax reports and ES202
records with the same corrected EIN. Both
sets of data also include a plant identification number; but the coding schemes differ
between the two files, so that we were unable to obtain an employment figure for
each worker's establishment. The resulting
file contains workers' quarterly earnings
from 1974 to 1987 and, for each calendar
year, their principal employers' EIN, four-

worker's principal employer was taken to
indicate his separation from his incumbent
firm. Second, data on the percentage of
total quarterly earnings received from the
year's principal employer were used to date
the quarter of that separation. In particular,
we attempted to determine the last quarter
that the employee received earnings from
the old principal employer. When this quarter was clearly in the last year when the old
employer was still the principal employer,
the quarter of separation was the last quarter of positive earnings from that employer.
For example, if the worker has earnings
from the old employer in the third but not
the fourth quarter of the last year when the
old employer was the principal employer,
we declare the separation to have occurred
in the third quarter of that year. However,
when the worker derived 100 percent of his
fourth-quarter earnings from the old principal employer, the separation date was taken
to be the quarter of the following year in
which the employee last received earnings
from sources other than the new principal
employer. For example, if the worker receives all of his earnings from the new employer in the second but not the first quarter of the first year the new employer is the
principal employer, we declare the separation to have occurred in the first quarter of
that year.
In most instances the foregoing procedure precisely dates the separation. There
appear to be two exceptions: first, when the
worker has another wage or salary job besides the job with the incumbent firm; sec-

ond, when the incumbent firm grants the
employee severance pay after displacement.
Both of those exceptions may cause us to
date the separation after it actually occurred. Thus, our dating procedure may
cause displaced workers' earnings to appear
falsely to decline during the quarters prior
which the worker received the greatest
to displacement. However our finding reamount of earnings during the year.
ported in the text, showing that predisplacement earnings losses are small in the nonB. Dating Workers' Separations
mass-layoff sample, would imply that if there
was a problem with our dating of separaWe used two pieces of information from
tions, it would only occur when workers
our Pennsylvania data to determine which
workers separated from their firms and when separate from distressed firms. We know of
no reason why that should be the case in
those separations occurred. First, a change
these data.
from one year to the next in the EIN of a
digit SIC industry, location, and average
employment during the last, current, and
following years. To keep the data-processing
to a manageable level, we only attached
data on the employment of the firm from

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

708 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW SEPTEMBER 1993

C. Sample Restrictions

As we noted in the text, we have chosen
to focus on high-tenure workers and have
restricted our sample in other ways in order
to avoid the difficulties associated with early
retirement and lack of attachment to Pennsylvania's wage and salary work force. The
high-tenure workers we examine are those
that were hired by their firms prior to 1974
and who remained with those firms (i.e., did
not experience a change of EIN) at least
through the end of 1979. Further, we limited our sample to those workers for which
the sex and age variables were present,
though we did not require them to have
data on race, a variable that was more frequently missing. In order to make our construction of the mass-layoff sample more
reasonable we eliminated workers whose
1979 firms had fewer than 50 employees.
To reduce the problems associated with
early retirement, our sample includes only
workers born between 1930 and 1959. As a
result, in 1979, workers in our sample were
at most 50 years of age and thus very unlikely to retire following their separations.
Finally, to avoid the difficulties associated
with persons who seem to disappear from
our data set, we required displaced workers
to have positive wage or salary earnings in
each calendar year between 1974 and 1986.
This restriction eliminated approximately 38
percent of our sample of high-tenure primeage separators. A majority of the eliminated

workers (70 percent) never had any positive reported earnings following their job
losses. Prior to their displacements, this
group earned $250 more per quarter and
were one and one-half years older than
workers in our sample. These persons were
also modestly more likely to be female and
to have been displaced from the service
sector.

D. Local Labor-Market Conditions
We obtained information on local employment and unemployment rates for 1976
through 1987 from various issues of the U.S.
Department of Labor's publication Employment and Earnings. To compute a locale's

trend level of employment growth we re-

gressed its log nonagricultural employment
on a time trend and on a vector of seasonal
dummy variables. The coefficients on the
trend variable represented a locale's longterm employment conditions. We controlled
for a locale's business-cycle conditions by
using its unemployment rate and the deviation of employment from trend. We constructed separate series for 12 of the state's
labor markets: Allentown, Altoona, Erie,
Harrisburg, Johnstown, Lancaster, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Reading, Williamsport,
York, and Scranton-Wilkes Barre. We assigned the series for the whole state to
workers from firms not in one of these markets.

REFERENCES

Addison, John T. and Portugal, Pedro, "Job
Displacement, Relative Wage Changes,
and Duration of Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics, July 1989, 7,
281-302.
Ashenfelter, Orley, "Estimating the Effect of
Training Programs on Earnings," Review
of Economics and Statistics, February
1978, 60, 47-57.
and Card, David, "Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to Estimate
the Effect of Training Programs," Review
of Economics and Statistics, November
1985, 67, 648-60.
Beaudry, Paul and DiNardo, John, "The Effect
of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of

Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence
from Micro Data," Journal of Political
Economy, August 1991, 99, 665-88.
Becker, Gary S., Human Capital, 2nd Ed.,
New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1975.
Blanchflower, David, "Fear, Unemployment,
and Pay Flexibility," Economic Journal,
May 1991, 101, 483-96.
Bound, John and Krueger, Alan B., "The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make
a Right?" Journal of Labor Economics,
January 1991, 9, 1-24.
Card, David and Sullivan, Daniel, "Estimating

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 83 NO. 4 JACOBSON ETAL.: EARNINGS LOSSES OF DISPLACED WORKERS 709

the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs on Movements In and Out of Employment," Econometrica, May 1988, 56,
497-530.
Di la Rica, Sara, "Displaced Workers in Mass
Layoffs: Pre-Displacement Earnings
Losses and Unions Effect," Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 303,
Princeton University, 1992.

Duncan, Greg J. and Hill, Daniel H., "An Investigation of the Extent and Conse-

quences of Measurement Error in
Labor-Economics Data on Earnings,"

Journal of Labor Economics, October
1985, 3, 508-32.

Flaim, Paul and Seghal, Ellen, "Displaced
Workers of 1979-83: How Well Have
They Fared?" Bulletin No. 2240, U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Washington, DC, 1985.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., "What Do We Know
About Worker Displacement in the
U.S.?" Industrial Relations, Winter 1989,
28, 51-9.
Heckman, James J. and Hotz, V. Joseph,

"Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental Methods for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of
Manpower Training," Journal of the
American Statistical Association, December 1989, 84, 862-74.
______ and Robb, Richard, "Alternative
Methods for Evaluating the Impact of
Interventions," in James J. Heckman and
Burton Singer, eds., Longitudinal Analysis
of the Labor Market Data, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1985, pp.
156-245.
Jacobson, Louis S., "Structural Change in the
Pennsylvania Economy," mimeo., W. E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI, 1988.

_,____ "The Dynamics of the Pittsburgh
Labor Market," mimeo., W. E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research,
Kalamazoo, MI, 1991.
Jacobson, Louis S., LaLonde, Robert J. and Sul-

livan, Daniel G., "The Costs of Worker
Dislocation," W. E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research Monograph Se-

ries, 1993 (forthcoming).

Jovanovic, Boyan, "Job Matching and the
Theory of Turnover," Journal of Political
Economy, October 1979, 87, 972-90.
Kletzer, Lori Gladstein, "Returns to Seniority
After a Permanent Job Loss," American
Economic Review, June 1989, 79, 536-43.

LaLonde, Robert J., "Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs
with Experimental Data," American Economic Review, September 1986, 76,
604-20.

lu,ztwt, V.6A V>, " Agpency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions," American Economic Review,
September 1981, 71, 606-20.

Lewis, H. Gregg, Union Relative Wage Effects:
A Survey, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1986.
Ruhm, Christopher J., "Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?"
American Economic Review, March 1991,
81, 319-23.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Alternative Theories of
Wage Determination and Unemployment
in LDCs: The Labor Turnover Model,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1974,
88, 194-227.
Swaim, Paul and Podgursky, Michael, "The
Distribution of Economic Losses Among
Displaced Workers: A Replication,"
Journal of Human Resources, Fall 1991,
26, 742-55.

Tannery, Frederick J., "Labor Market Adjustments to Structural Change: Comparisons
Between Allegheny County and the Rest
of Pennsylvania, 1979-87," mimeo, Economic Policy Institute, University of Pittsburgh, 1991.
Topel, Robert, "Specific Capital and Unemployment: Measuring the Costs and Consequences of Worker Displacement,"
Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy,
Autumn 1990, 33,181-214.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population
Survey, January 1986: Displaced Workers,
Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research, 1988.
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and
Earnings, Washington, DC; U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Tue, 26 Feb 2019 22:24:23 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

