Journal of Applied Psychology
1984, Vol 69, No 2, 307-321

Copyright 1984 by the
American Psychological Association, lnc

Mediators, Moderators, and Tests for Mediation
Lawrence R. James

Jeanne M. Brett

Georgia Institute of Technology

Graduate School of Management,
Northwestern University

The following points are developed. First, mediation relations are generally thought
of in causal terms. Influences of an antecedent are transmitted to a consequence
through an intervening mediator. Second, mediation relations may assume a number
of functional forms, including nonadditive, nonlinear, and nonrecursive forms
Special attention is given to nonadditive forms, or moderated mediation, where it
is shown that, although mediation and moderation are distinguishable processes,
a particular variable may be both a mediator and a moderator within a single set
of functional relations Third, current procedures for testing mediation relations
m industrial and organizational psychology need to be updated because these procedures often involve a dubious interplay between exploratory (correlational) statistical tests and causal inference It is suggested that no middle ground exists
between exploratory and confirmatory (causal) analysis and that attempts to explain
how mediation processes occur require well-specified causal models. Given such
models, confirmatory analytic techniques furnish the more informative tests of
mediation.

Researchers in industrial and organizational
psychology and organizational behavior are
placing increasing emphasis on studying mediation models in which the influence of an
antecedent is transmitted to a consequence
through an intervening mediator. Cases in
point include (a) job-perception studies in
which the effects of work environments (antecedents) are transmitted to affective and behavioral outcomes (consequences) by intervening job perceptions (mediators; cf. Brass,
1981; Oldham & Hackman, 1981; Rousseau,
1978a, 1978b; Sutton & Rousseau, 1979); (b)
attrition studies in which the influences of environmental events and individual attributes

Support for this project was provided under Office
of Naval Research Contracts N00014-80-C-0315 and
N00014-83-K-0480, Office of Naval Research Projects
NR170-904andNR475-026 Opinions expressed are those
of the authors and are not to be construed as necessarily
reflecting the official view or endorsement of the Department of the Navy
The authors wish to thank Robert G Demaree, Jeanne
L Dugas, Sigrid B Gustafson, Allan P. Jones, Stanley A
Mulaik, and Gernt Wolf for their helpful suggestions and
advice
Requests for reprints should be sent to Lawrence R
James, School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332

are transmitted to attrition behaviors via intervening behavioral intentions to stay or leave
(cf. Arnold & Feldman, 1982; Horn & Hulin,
1981; Horn, Katerberg, & Hulin, 1979; Miller,
Katerberg, & Hulin, 1979; Mobley, Hand,
Baker, & Meghno, 1979; Mobley, Homer, &
Hollingsworth, 1978); and (c) attribution research m leadership, where the effects of subordinate performance on subsequent behaviors
by the leader toward a subordinate are transmitted by the leader's attributions of the causes
of the subordinate's performance (cf. Ilgen,
Mitchell, & Fredrickson, 1981; McFillen,
1978; Mitchell & Kalb, 1981; Mitchell &
Wood, 1980).
At the theoretical level, studies such as these
are typically based on causal models that assume complete mediation as well as additive
and linear causal relations. To illustrate the
principles involved, a complete mediation
model has the form x —• m —> y, where JC is
the antecedent, m is the mediator, and y is the
consequence. The antecedent x is expected to
affect the consequence y only indirectly
through transmission of influence from x to
y by the mediator m. The indirect transmission
of influence from x to y via m denotes that
all of the effect of x on y is transmitted by m.
In causal terminology, this state of affairs is

307

308

LAWRENCE R. JAMES AND JEANNE M. BRETT

described as "the effect of x on y is completely
mediated by m"; thus the term complete mediation model Assuming linear and additive
causal relations, the complete mediation model
thus predicts that x has a direct effect on m,
m has a direct effect on y, and x is not related
directly to y when m is held constant, if these
predictions are empirically confirmed, then
one may infer that the complete mediation
model has been corroborated and therefore is
useful for attempting to explain how x is related to y through the intervening mediator
m (James, Mulaik, & Brett, 1982). Explanation
is a matter of elucidating the processes by
which m is a linear, additive function of x and
y is a linear, additive function of m (Rozeboom,
1956).
This article has two objectives, both of
which resulted from observations that many
studies that ostensibly derived from a linear,
additive, complete mediation model departed
from this theoretical base during empirical
operationalizations of the model and/or explanations of the results of empirical tests of
the model. The first objective is to discuss
complete mediation models that imply additivity but take on a distinctly nonadditive flavor
in empirical operationalizations, empirical
tests, and explanations of results. A case in
point is the attribution model of leader behavior proposed by Green and Mitchell (1979),
which is: subordinate performance (x) —»
leader's attributions of the causes of the subordinate's performance (m) —* leader behavior
toward the subordinate (y). This model appears
to assume the x —• m —» y form, where attributions transmit, additively and linearly, influence from subordinate performance to
leader behaviors. Some attribution studies in
leadership do indeed maintain an additive,
linear, complete mediation form, although
causes of leaders' attributions other than subordinate performance are typically included
in investigations (e.g., interdependence of supervisor and subordinate, see prior references).
In other operationalizations, tests, and interpretations of the complete mediation model,
the attributions are not treated as simple mediators. Rather, they appear to assume the role
of moderators (Ilgen & Knowlton, 1980;
Knowlton & Mitchell, 1980—see also Goodstadt & Kipnis, 1970; Kipnis & Cosentino,
1969; Kipnis, Silverman, & Copeland, 1973).
For example, empirical evidence indicates that

if poor subordinate performance is attributed
to lack of effort, but not to lack of ability, then
the leader is likely to increase close supervision
and decrease support. Conversely, if poor subordinate performance is attributed to lack of
ability (interpreted here as lack of training and
experience), but not to lack of effort, then the
leader is likely to increase support but not
close supervision, at least not in the sense of
the use of coercive power (e.g., reprimand the
subordinate).
These informative findings imply that the
comparative strengths of attributions to ability
and effort serve to moderate the relation between subordinate performance and leader
behavior. This stimulates the question: Are the
attributions also mediators in the sense that
they intervene between subordinate performance and leader behavior toward the subordinate, as predicted by the Green and
Mitchell (1979) model? An answer to this
question is not easily furnished because it requires that we explore relations between the
concepts of mediator and moderator. In the
broader context, of concern are answers to
questions such as, "Must mediation relations
be additive?" "May mediators also be moderators?" and "May moderators also assume
the role of mediators?" Exploration of the mediator and moderator concepts and answers
to these and related questions comprise the
first objective of this article.
The second objective is to demonstrate why
investigators should devote more attention to
the assumptions for confirmatory (causal)
analysis before conducting confirmatory tests
of complete mediation models. Consider, for
example, the job perception and attrition
studies cited at the beginning of this article.
Each of these studies proposed a verbal, and
often graphic, complete mediation model,
which was then tested using analytic procedures typically associated with exploratory
(i.e., correlational) analysis, such as hierarchical regression and/or partial correlation.
When methods such as hierarchical regression
and partial correlation are used to test complete mediation hypotheses, it follows that the
methods have assumed the roles of confirmatory tests. It follows also that, like other
forms of confirmatory analysis (e.g., path
analysis), these methods should only be employed after conditions for confirmatory analysis have been reasonably satisfied. The use of

MEDIATION

309

traditionally exploratory methods to test causal within-job variation in job perceptions (and
models does not absolve the researcher from job satisfaction) are not included in the causal
having to satisfy conditions for confirmatory models or tested empirically. Clearly, if job
analysis.
perceptions and job satisfaction vary reliably
To set a fair stage for discussion, it should within levels of technology, then the intervenbe noted that prior tests of complete mediation ing job perceptions are not just transmitting
models in the job perception and attrition lit- influences from job technology to job satiseratures represent initial attempts to advance faction. Rather, other causes ofjob perceptions
from purely exploratory forms of analysis to (and job satisfaction), such as personal attriconfirmatory tests of causal hypotheses. Fur- butes and social influences, will likely have to
thermore, investigators typically devoted at- be invoked to explain the reliable within-job
tention to some of the conditions for confir- variation in job perceptions (see James &
matory analysis, such as justifying the pre- Jones, 1980; Kim, 1980; O'Reilly, Parlette, &
sumed causal ordering among variables. Our Bloom, 1980; Schmitt, Coyle, White, & Rausconcern is that these initial and much needed chenberger, 1978; Thomas & Griffin, 1983).
attempts to advancefromexploratory analysis When not included in a causal model, these
to confirmatory analysis must now be regarded other causes are referred to as unmeasured
as incomplete in the context of recent accu- variables Given stipulations to be discussed
mulation of knowledge in industrial and or- later, failure to include one or more unmeaganizational psychology regarding all of the sured variables in the causal model results in
conditions that are prerequisite to meaningful biased statistical results and erroneous causal
confirmatory analysis (James et al., 1982). inferences in regard to relations among variMoreover, whereas hierarchical regression and ables included explicitly in the causal model
partial correlation may indeed be used in the (cf. James, 1980).
confirmatory mode (Cohen & Cohen, 1983),
Unmeasured variable problems are sympthese methods are limited in regard to both tomatic of the incomplete transition from exthe types of causal models for which they are ploratory modes of analysis to confirmatory
applicable and the information they provide modes of analysis. In the presentation of Ob(Griffin, 1977).
jective 2, we will address these problems and
To illustrate concerns pertaining to condi- other key conditions required for confirmatory
tions for confirmatory analysis, consider that analysis that must be considered in order to
empirical support for the complete mediation effect a complete transition from exploratory
model, job environment (e.g., job technol- analysis to confirmatory analysis. We will also
ogy) —»job perceptions (e.g., job challenge) —* recommend that hierarchical regression and
job satisfaction, is interpreted to mean that partial correlation should not be used in place
(a) job perceptions transmit causal influences of confirmatory analytic procedures.
from the job environment to job satisfaction,
and (b) individuals experiencing the same or
Objective 1: An Attempt to Distinguish
similar type(s) of environments may differ in
Between Mediators and Moderators
terms of how they perceive the job and, thereThefirstobjective of this article is to define
fore, differ in how they respond affectively to
the job (see prior references). Interpretation mediation and moderation and then to com"a" denotes that job perceptions covary sig- pare mediation with moderation. As part of
nificantly with between-job variation in such this process, we shall see that contemporary
things as levels of technology and that co- definitions of mediation are somewhat misvariation in job perceptions is associated sig- leading and that the distinction between menificantly with covariation in job satisfaction. diation and moderation can be blurred at both
The empirical data support this interpretation, the theoretical and operational levels of exwhich reflects an attempt to enhance expla- planation.
nation of the processes by which job environments influence job satisfaction by identifying Contemporary Definitions
an intervemng, perceptual mediators).
The definition of mediator advanced by
Interpretation "b" is not a legitimate causal Rozeboom (1956) for hypothetical constructs
inference because relevant causes of reliable appears to be characteristic of the linear, ad-

310

LAWRENCE R JAMES AND JEANNE M BRETT

ditive, complete mediation models employed function (although often tested by a hierarin many areas of psychology and the social chical process) in which it is desirable to have
sciences. This definition is as follows: m is a minimal covariation between the moderator
mediator of the probabilistic relation y =f(x) and both the independent and dependent variif m is a probabilistic function of x (i.e., m = ables (Abrahams & Alf, 1972). In comparison,
f[x]) and y is a probabilistic function of m mediation models must be represented by at
(i.e., y =/[/«]), where x, m, and y have different least two additive, linear functions m which
ontological content (i.e., represent different it is desirable to have high degrees of covarihypothetical constructs or latent variables). As ation between the mediator and both the andiscussed earlier, theoretical operationaliza- tecedents) and consequence(s). Use of the
tions of mediation are usually based on causal terms independent and dependent in moderator
mediation models, which in shorthand nota- models, and antecedent and consequence in
tion assume the form x —> m—> y. In additionmediator models, is purposeful and indicates
to the obvious point that a causal order must that moderation carries with it no connotation
be assumed, the typical causal mediation of causality, although a causal relation may
model is based on the premises that (a) the be moderated (cf. Stolzenberg, 1979). Media/ s in m - f{x) and y = f(m) represent linear, tion, on the other hand, implies at the miniadditive, and recursive (i.e., unidirectional) mum a causal order, and often additional
functions, which in equation form for devia- causal implications are required to explain
tion scores are m = bx + e and y = bm + e, how mediation occurred (these implications
where b is a causal parameter and e is an error are considered later). Because of the causal
or disturbance; (b) m transmits all of the in- overtones in mediation relations, a confirfluence of an antecedent x to a consequence matory analytic approach is employed below
y, which implies that x and y are indirectly to illustrate additional issues in moderation
related and that the relation between x and y and mediation, although the basic statistical
vanishes if m is held constant; and (c) the in- arguments generalize to exploratory designs
clusion of m in the model serves to enhance
the explanatory power of the model because
m furnishes substantive explication of how the Moderated Mediation
antecedent is related to the consequence,
Things are not necessarily as straightforward
whereby "related" means how x "produces,"
as
the above definitional demarcations suggest,
"acts on," or otherwise influences y (cf Alwin
one
reason being that mediation relations may
& Hauser, 1975; Blalock, 1982; Cook &
Campbell, 1979; Duncan, 1975; Heise, 1975; involve a moderator, m which case the mediation relations cannot be additive. The issues
James et al, 1982; Kenny, 1979).
here will be presented by way of illustration
With respect to moderation, a variable z is for a self-attribution model based on simplified
a moderator if the relationship between two and overdramatized abstractions from Ban(or more) other variables, say x and y, is a dura (1977, 1978), Jones (1973), and Werner
function of the level of z. This definition in- (1979). Suppose we conduct a study designed
dicates an x by z interaction, or a nonadditive to test the propositions that (a) effort attrirelation, where y is regarded as a probabilistic butions mediate the relation between level of
function of x and z. Specifically, the proba- poor performance and degree of intended perbilistic function is y = f(x, z), the function / sistence for high-self-esteem individuals and
being y — btx + b2z + byKZ + e for deviation (b) ability attributions mediate the relation
scores and a model linear in the parameters. between level of poor performance and degree
The bs in this function will be regarded of intended persistence for low-self-esteem inas noncausal, statistical parameters for the dividuals. The proposed causal models are
shown in Figure 1, section a. Individuals are
present.
If we compare this definition to the Roze- first given a self-esteem questionnaire and then
boom (1956) definition for mediation, it would blocked (subgrouped) into high self-esteems
seem that a number of clear lines of demar- or low self-esteems, the criterion for blocking
cation exist between the terms mediator and being whether an individual scores above or
moderator. In particular, the moderator model below a theoretical point on the self-esteem
is represented by a single, nonadditive, linear scale. Second, within the high- and low-self-

311

MEDIATION

esteem blocks, individuals are assigned ran- 0 = Effort [ability] had no effect on my perdomly to five bogus performance-feedback formance . . 6 = My performance was
conditions (explained below). Third, individ- strongly affected by a lack of effort [ability]).
uals in allfiveconditions are asked to perform After completing the attribution items, indithe same moderately difficult task, which re- viduals are asked to report the extent to which
quires mental effort and approximately 15 they would now be willing to participate m a
minutes to complete. Fourth, following task similar task (e.g., 1 = Definitely not participate
. 3 = Ambivalent about participation . . .
completion, individuals are given bogus performance feedback implying that they have 5 = Definitely participate). Scores on this scale
failed the task. Degree of failure is varied on represent degrees of "intended persistence."
an approximately interval scale (e.g., Condition This is checked empirically by conducting a
second task, but we shall use the intended per1. 50% of the people did better than you .
Condition 5- 90% of the people did better thansistence indicator in order to stay m the parayou). Fifth, individuals are asked to make two metric realm and thereby not get bogged down
attributions, one regarding the degree to which in extraneous statistical issues. Finally, the extheir performance was due to lack of effort periment is ended by debriefing participants.
To demonstrate principles, realizing that
and one regarding the degree to which their
performance was due to lack of ability (e.g., dichotomous blocking on a continuous self-

Block

Mediation

Relation

High
Self-Esteem

Performance
Feedback

*"

Effort
Attributions

Low
Self-Esteem

Performance
Feedback

*"

Ability
Attributions

%

3
PF

Intended
Persistence
Intended
Persistence

^

-HSE

-LSE

-LSE

-HSE

1

3
PF

(b)

IP

5
H
3
2
I

-HSE

5
1

-HSE

IP 3
-LSE

1
I

*.

3

-LSE

a.

3

E

A

(d)

(e)

M

5

b

Figure 1 Mediation relations for performance feedback (PF), effort (E) and ability (A) attributions, and
intended persistence (IP), moderated by self-esteem (HSE = high self-esteem, LSE = low self-esteem)

312

LAWRENCE R. JAMES AND JEANNE M BRETT

essentially not attributed to effort. The rationale for these relations is that (a) implied failure is consistent with low-self-esteem individuals' lack of self-confidence, thereby resulting
in the performance feedback —» ability attribution relation and (b) intent to persist, which
is never high, decreases as attributions to lack
of ability increase because individuals perceive
an increasing likelihood of failure and, as a
form of defense, withdraw to protect an already vulnerable self-concept (cf. Jones, 1973).
Now let us play the game of find the moderators) and the mediators). Application of
the Rozeboom (1956) definition for mediation
indicates that self-esteem is not a mediator
because self-esteem is not a direct or indirect
function of performance feedback. That is, if
x = performance feedback and m — self-esteem, then self-esteem fails to satisfy the first
criterion for mediation because m i=f(x). This
is clearly the case because self-esteem was
measured before the experiment. Rather, selfesteem is a moderator, which is evident in
Figure 1 because relations between the antecedent performance-feedback conditions and
the attributions, and between the attributions
and intended persistence, are contingent on
the level of self-esteem.
In contrast, the attributions appear to be
mediators. The attributions have ontological
content that differs from performance feedback and intended persistence (and self-esteem). There is an explicit causal order in
which the attributions occur after performance
feedback and prior to intended persistence,
and, contingent on the level of self-esteem, the
In regard to low-self-esteem individuals, attributions are effects of performance feedFigure 1, sections b and c, shows that ability, back and causes of intended persistence. This
but not effort, attributions are a positive func- suggests that inclusion of the attributions in
tion of performance feedback. That is, the the model helps to explain how performance
higher the failure, the stronger the attribution feedback influences intended persistence in the
to lack of ability, for which scores vary from sense that the attributions specify the processes
2 to 6 (see Figure 1, section c), but scores on by which the influences of performance feedeffort attributions assume random values be- back are transmitted to intended persistence.
tween 0 and 1 and are unrelated to degree of Finally, the attributions are complete mediafailure (see Figure 1, section b). Figure 1, sec- tors of the relation between performance feedtion e, demonstrates that intended persistence back and intended persistence, contingent on
is an inverse function of ability attributions the level of self-esteem, which is to say that
(i.e., the stronger the attribution to lack of performance feedback affects intended persisability, the lower the intention to participate tence only indirectly through the attributions.
in the second task). Effort attributions are not
The fact that the mediation relations are
related to intended persistence (see Figure 1, contingent on the level of self-esteem suggests
section d) because performance feedback was the need to amend Rozeboom's (1956) defiesteem variable is questionable and that the
relations to be presented are overdramatic, let
us suppose that the results of our study correspond to a priori predictions and are as
shown in Figure 1, sections b through e. These
figures portray regression slopes associated
with relations among raw or deviation scores
on the variables. For high self-esteem individuals, Figure 1, sections b and c, suggests a
tendency to attribute increasing degrees of
failure to a steadily increasing lack of effort,
but not to ability. Specifically, scores on effort
attributions varyfrom2 to 6 and are associated
with performance feedback (see Figure 1, section b), whereas scores on ability attributions
vary randomly between 0 and 1 and are not
associated with performance feedback (see
Figure 1, section c). The explanation for these
results is that high-self-esteem individuals have
confidence in their abilities and thus are prone
to attribute unexpected failure to an unstable
cause such as lack of effort. Continuing with
high-self-esteem individuals, Figure 1, section
d, indicates that the higher the perceived lack
of effort, the more likely the intended persistence to participate on a second task The rationale here is that comparatively stronger effort attributions reflect a greater imbalance
between a positive self-concept and performance feedback, and therefore a stronger force
to correct the imbalance by performing successfully on the second task. Finally, inasmuch
as performance was essentially not attributed
to ability, ability attributions are unrelated to
intended persistence for high-self-esteem individuals (see Figure 1, section e).

313

MEDIATION

nition of mediation to include moderation.
This is easily accomplished by mapping the
Rozeboom (1956) functional relations into the
relations and accompanying functional equations implied by Figure 1, only here we will
include the nonadditive relations required by
the self-esteem moderator. The term functional
equation refers to a quantitative statement of
the presumed structure of causal relations
among a set of variables in a self-contained
system, whereby self-contained is meant that
all relevant causes of an effect or endogenous
variable are included m the equation for that
variable (James et al., 1982; Simon, 1952,
1953, 1977). For the Rozeboom function m =
J{x), we have E = f(PF, SE) and A = f(PF,
SE), where E = effort attribution, PF = performance feedback, SE = self-esteem, and A =
ability attribution The "/" in the functions
for E and A represents a nonadditive, although
linear, relation, as seen by the inclusion of
interaction terms in the following functional
equations for E and A (the variables in these
equations and all remaining equations are assumed to be in deviation form).

as a function of SE blocks in Figure 1, Section
b through Section e. Technically, heterogeneous errors of estimate would preclude tests
of slope—Gulliksen & Wilks, 1950).
The salient point here is that moderation
may be functionally involved in the first-stage
of a mediation relation, but the moderator is
not a mediator. Specifically, variation in performance feedback affects only an attribution,
but the explanation of the effects of performance feedback on ability and effort attributions is contingent on the level of self-esteem. Moderation carries over into the second
stage of mediation in this model, because the
relations between intended persistence and
both effort and ability attributions are contingent on the level of self-esteem (see Figure 1,
Sections d and e). Rozeboom's second functional relation for mediated relations, y -f(m),
stated separately for A and E, is IP =f(A, SE)
and IP = / ( £ , SE), where IP = intended persistence, and the functions again represent
nonadditive relations In equation form, the
functions are as follows:
IP = b]PJ£ + bIP^ESE

E = bE,PFPF + bEtSESE

XSE) + e

+ bE,{PFXsE{PF X SE) + e

(1)

A = bA,PFPF + bA<SESE

IP = bIP,AA +
+ bIPMxSE)(AXSE)

XSE)

(2)

(3)

+e

(4)

Like Equations 1 and 2, OLS estimates of
The "6s" in Equations 1 and 2 represent causal the structural parameters representing the inor structural parameters. For example, bEiPF teractions would be significant This suggests
in Equation 1 is denned as the unique amount that the attributions transmit the influence of
of change in E brought about by a unit of performance feedback to intended persistence
change in PF. Given reasonable satisfaction and enhance the explanatory power of the
of the assumptions or conditions for confir- model by specifying the processes through
matory analysis, which are discussed in Ob- which feedback acts on intentions. However,
jective 2, the structural parameters may be such transmission and enhancement is conestimated by unstandardized, ordinary least tingent on the level of self-esteem, and although
squares (OLS) regression weights. In this sense, self-esteem transmits nothing from feedback
the statistical estimating equations for Equa- to intentions, and thus cannot be a mediator,
tions 1 and 2 may be thought of as simple it contributes directly to the explanatory power
multiple regression equations. Inspection of of the model. It might also be noted that a
Figure 1, Sections b and c, indicates that es- single equation for IP could be developed.
timates of the structural parameters repre- Analyses would demonstrate that the equation
senting the interactions (i.e., bExPFxsE) and with the best fit to the data would involve the
bAAPFxSE)) will be significant. In other words,first-order interactions bjPi(ExsE)(E X SE) and
the relation between E and PF is moderated bIPXAXSE){A X SE). Interactions involving
by SE, as is the relation between A and PF. (A X E) and (AX EX SE) would be redundant
(A point worthy of brief mention is that errors with the first-order interactions using SE as
of estimate as well as slope coefficients vary the moderator.

314

LAWRENCE R JAMES AND JEANNE M BRETT

A final test of the model would consist of satisfied before a variable may be designated
ascertaining whether all of the influence of a mediator. It is particularly important to recperformance feedback (PF) on IP is trans- ognize that m = f(x) and y = f(m) not only
mitted by the mediating attribution variables. assume an explicit causal order but also imply
The many options available for this test, typ- active causal processes in which m transmits
ically referred to as a "goodness of fit test" or the effects of x to y and, as part of this transa "test of logical consistency," include an mission process, enhances explanation because
omitted parameter test (Duncan, 1975; James it specifies the processes by which x acts on
et al., 1982; Namboodiri, Carter, & Blalock, or produces y. On the other hand, there is no
1975), a disturbance term regression test requirement that mediation relations be ad(James & Jones, 1980), and hierarchical OLS ditive. Nonadditive relations require the adin the confirmatory mode. Given high cor- dition of a moderator for either the m =f(x)
relations between PF and E in the high-self- or y =f(m) relations, or both (as shown here).
esteem block, and between PF and A in the In this condition, the moderator is added to
low-self-esteem block, use of the omitted pa- the function (e.g., IP = f[A, SE]) and "/" is
rameter test would likely be subject to mul- specified as nonadditive. The term moderated
ticollinearity. Thus, the latter two procedures mediation is suggested for such models to dewould be the prime candidates for the good- note that mediation relations are contingent
ness-of-fit test To illustrate the use of hier- on the level of a moderator.
archical OLS in the confirmatory mode, the
regressions indicated by Equations 3 and 4
would be conducted and i?2s estimated. These Roles of Variables in Mediation
are referred to as R23 and R24 to indicate es- and Moderation
timates based on Equations 3 and 4, respecIt follows from the discussion above that
tively. Next, .PF and (PF X SE) would be added mediators are distinguished from moderators
to Equation 3 as independent variables, and by the operational roles played by variables in
a new R2 computed, which is designated R23+. functional relations and equations. A seemA nonsignificant difference between R23 and ingly logical deduction is that a particular
R23+ would imply that, within the self-esteem variable can be unambiguously classified as
blocks, PF is not directly related to IP when either a mediator or a moderator In some,
E is held constant. The key inference would and perhaps most, cases this is true. In other
be that E completely mediates the effects of cases it is false because a particular variable
PF on IP for high-self-esteem individuals. A may assume the roles of both mediator and
similar process would be conducted for Equa- moderator in the same model, and even in the
tion 4, namely PF and (PF X SE) would be same functional relation and equation. To see
added to Equation 4 and J?24+ computed. A how this could occur, suppose we conduct the
nonsignificant difference between R2A and i?24+ same experiment as described above, only this
would confirm the prediction that A com- time we randomly assign individuals to the
pletely mediates the influences of PF on IP five performance-feedback conditions without
for low-self-esteem individuals. Should R23+ > measurement or blocking on self-esteem. AsR\, and/or i?24+ > R24, then at least one of suming that high-self-esteem individuals are
the predictions based on the causal model has as likely as low-self-esteem individuals to be
been disconfirmed. The resulting inference randomly placed m each performance-feedwould be that at least one of the mediators is back condition, we would find that each atnot a complete mediator, which is to say that tribution variable serves as both a mediator
PF has a direct effect on IP in the high-self- and a moderator.
esteem block and/or the low-self-esteem block.
Illustrations of the relations are presented
In sum, moderators and mediators have dif- in Figure 2. Figure 2, sections b and c, shows
ferent roles, even though they may occur that ability attributions moderate the regresjointly in the same model. If one is willing to sions of effort attributions on performance
adopt the formal definition of mediator for feedback and intended persistence on effort
hypothetical constructs advanced by Roze- attributions. The rationale here is the same as
boom (1956), then specific criteria must be that for self-esteem, only here high-self-esteem

315

MEDIATION
A=0,1

E=0,1

A>2

I

a

S

H

5

I

a

PF

5

5
M

IP

3

4

S

PF

3

IP

a
I

ES2

3
I

o

|

»

3

M

5

fc

I

E

i

3

H 5 fc

A

Cc)

(<i)

Figure 2 Functional components of mediation relations with ability (A) and effort (E) attributions serving
as both mediators and moderators (PF = performance feedback, IP = intended persistence)

individuals are represented by scores of 0 or
1 on the ability attribution scale, and low-selfesteem individuals are represented by scores
equal to or greater than 2 on the ability attribution scale. The salient points are that effort attributions are mediators, whereas ability
attributions are moderators. Consistent with
these points is the observation that an attempt
to fit a linear, additive, mediation model to
the relations involving effort attributions,
namely E = f(PF) and IP = f(E), would fail
because the errors of estimate are heteroscedastic in both relations. This is easily seen, for
example, in Figure 2, section a, where the
cluster of points in the bivanate scatterplot
would be roughly triangular if moderation by
ability was disregarded.
We can now reverse the process, so to speak,
and regard effort attributions as the moderator
and ability attributions as the mediator. As
seen in Figure 2, section b, the regression of
ability attributions on performance feedback
is "significant" for individuals with scores of
0 and 1 on the effort attribution scale (lowself-esteem individuals), and "nonsignificant"
for individuals with scores equal to or greater
than 2 on the effort attribution scale (highself-esteem individuals). The moderation by

effort attributions carries over to the regression
of intended persistence on ability attributions
(see Figure 1, section d).
Algebraic expression may help to clarify the
points above. Mapping the Rozeboom (1956)
relation rh = f(x), amended for moderation,
into the relations above furnishes the following
functional equations:
E = bE,PFPF +

bE,AA
bE,iPFXA)(PF

XA)

(5)

XE)

(6)

A = bA,PFPF + bA,EE
bMPFxE)(PF

Figure 2, sections a and b, denotes that
OLS estimates of terms representing the interactions will be significant, thus indicating
that both A and E assume the functional role
of moderator in one of the equations. Yet,
each attribution satisfies the first criterion for
moderated mediation in the equation m which
it serves as an endogenous (dependent) variable.
Joint roles as a mediator and as a moderator
are even more apparent when Rozeboom's
second criterion for a mediation relation, y =
f(m) amended for moderation, is mapped into

316

LAWRENCE R. JAMES AND JEANNE M. BRETT

our example. The equation is the same for functions may involve nonrecursive relations,
either^ or £ as a mediator and/or moderator, such as x —* m <=> y, where "<=»" denotes reciprocal causation. The mediation relation in
and is as follows:
this case would be m = f(x, y), y = f(m),
+ biP,A
IP =
although additional exogenous causes of m and
(7) y would have to be added before empirical
tests are possible (cf. James & Singh, 1978)
Given that the estimate of bIPt(ExA) is signifi- Examples of tests for mediation m nonrecurcant, Equation 7 may be interpreted as (a) the sive designs are presented in James and Jones
effects of E on IP are contingent on the value (1980) and Maruyama and McGarvey (1980)
of A (see Figure 2, section c), or as (b) the Cyclical recursive designs involving feedback
effects of A on IP are contingent on the level loops are another possibility, such as x —>m —>
of E (see Figure 2, section d). Combining the y —• x, where m = f(x), y = f(m), and x =
first interpretation of Equation 7 with Equa- f(y). The last term represents a feedback loop,
tion 5 gives us £ as a mediator and A as a with a specified time interval, from y to x.
moderator. Combining the second interpre- Empirical tests of cyclical recursive designs
tation of Equation 7 with Equation 6 gives us require a time-series analysis in which each
variable is measured at a distinct time period
A as a mediator and E as a moderator
In conclusion, it may be impossible to clas- that reflects the (causal) interval required for
sify a particular variable as either a mediator cause-effect relations to stabilize (cf. Heise,
or a moderator because this variable may play 1975; James et al., 1982; Strotz & Wold, 1971).
Finally, prior discussion has focused on
both roles in a set of simultaneous equations
designed to represent a causal model or system complete mediation, where the antecedent x
(i.e., Equations 5, 6, and 7 represent a set of affects the consequence y only indirectly
simultaneous, functional equations for one through the mediator m. The possibility of
causal system—cf. Simon, 1977). This need partial mediation also exists. A partial menot be confusing if one remembers that it is diation model is usually displayed in one of
the role or roles that a variable plays that de- the following two equivalent forms, given that
termine whether it is a moderator, a mediator, relations are recursive'
or both. Thus, applying the definitions for mediation, moderation, and moderated mediation
m
m
to the operational role(s) played by a variable
in each functional relation and equation over
the set of relations and equations in a causal
system furnishes the basis for ascertaining In these models, x has both a direct effect on
whether the variable is a mediator, a moder- y and an indirect effect on y, the latter being
ator, or both a mediator and a moderator.
transmitted by m. This indicates that only part
of the total effect of x on y is due to mediation
by
m (cf. Duncan, 1970, 1975; Heise, 1975;
Other Amendments to the Functional
Kenny,
1979). The mediation function has the
Definition of Mediation
form rh = J\x), y = f(x, m). Analytic proceIn addition to moderation, it is necessary dures for partial mediation models are overto extend the Rozeboom (1956) functional def- viewed in Alwin and Hauser (1975).
inition of mediation to other types of functional relations. First, there is the question of Summary
nonlinearity in the variables. For example, m
may be a linear, additive function of x, but y
There are many types of causal mediation
may be an additive, nonlinear function of m. relations and models. Yet, all have the common
The mediation relation takes a form such as attribute that the mediator transmits influence
fn = f(x), y = /(AM2), which may be tested from an antecedent to a consequence. The
empirically by applying hierarchical OLS pro- transmission need not involve all of the influcedures to operationalized functional equa- ence of the antecedent on the consequence,
tions (Stolzenberg, 1979). Second, mediation nor need the mediation relation be additive,

\I

MEDIATION

linear, or recursive. Indeed, many possible
combinations exist. Nevertheless, each combination specifies a particular operational role
for each variable, and mediators are those
variables whose operational role involves
transmission of influence. With mediators thus
described, let us now turn to the question of
specification errors in causal mediation models
and tests of causal mediation models.
Objective 2: Identifying Specification Errors
in Causal Mediation Models
A confirmatory test of a causal mediation
model is designed to ascertain whether the
model is useful for explaining how variables
included explicitly in the model occurred and
are related (cf. James et al., 1982). Confirmatory tests should only be conducted on
"well-specified" causal models, by which it is
meant that the assumptions or conditions for
confirmatory analysis have been reasonably
satisfied. Specification error is the general term
used in confirmatory analysis to indicate that
one or more conditions for confirmatory analysis has (have) not been reasonably satisfied.
In the presentation below, we have selectively
focused attention on specification errors considered to be of major salience in confirmatory
tests of complete mediation models. The discussion is presented in the form of summary
statements, with accompanying references because space considerations preclude furnishing
a thorough review here. Brief mention is made
of additional concerns in concluding remarks,
with emphasis placed on the need to adopt
analytic methods specifically designed for
confirmatory analysis.
To preface our remarks, allow us to reiterate
several points made in the introductory comments to this article. The specification errors
discussed below are symptomatic of an incomplete transition from exploratory analysis
to confirmatory analysis in areas such as job
perception and attrition research. The specification errors became apparent only after
knowledge accumulated concerning all of the
conditions that are prerequisite to meaningful
confirmatory analysis. In a sense, therefore, it
is unfair to criticize prior research on complete
mediation models inasmuch as researchers
employed what at the time was considered a
valid paradigm for causal analysis. On the

317

other hand, a complete transition from
exploratory analysis to confirmatory analysis
will not be effected until the specification errors
are recognized and subsequently addressed in
future research. Thus, we will point out the
specification errors in prior research, but we
shall do so at a general level and in the interest
of identifying the principles involved rather
than raising ad hominem arguments in regard
to specific studies.
Examples of important specification errors
in causal, or structural, models based on complete mediation relations of the form x —* m —»
y include the following: (a) misspecification of
causal order (e.g, the true model is m —* x —>
y or x —> y —»m); (b) misspecification of causal
direction (e.g., the true model is x —> m <=> y);
(c) lack of self-containment, or an unmeasured
variables problem, which is illustrated below;
(d) the assumed additive, linear relations are
nonadditive, nonlinear, or both; and (e) the
model is unstable (i.e., nonstationary), which
denotes that the variables and relations in the
model are subject to severe random fluctuations or shocks (cf. James et al., 1982). It is
only after (a) the model can be regarded as
not being subject to one or more of these major
specification errors and (b) after the model is
shown by confirmatory analysis to have a good
empirical fit with data that (c) it is justified
to consider the results of the confirmatory
analysis as useful for attempting to explain
how a mediation process occurred (i.e., to
make causal inferences), or to employ a term
such as causal effect or its various euphemisms,
such as "determine," "indirect effect," "influence," and "transmit."
Now consider that many mediation studies
in the industrial and organizational literature
and the organizational behavior literature begin with verbal, and often graphic, causal
models in which considerable attention is given
to causal order and explication of mediation
processes. Causal relations are typically recursive throughout the model, although this
appears to be more a matter of convenience
than a well-thought-out, defensible case for
unidirectional causation. Attention may or
may not be given to additivity, linearity, and
stability. However, attention is almost never
given to the possibility of misspecification due
to a "serious" unmeasured variables problem.
By a serious unmeasured variables problem

318

LAWRENCE R. JAMES AND JEANNE M. BRETT

is meant that a stable variable exists that (a)
has a unique, nonmmor, direct influence on
an effect (either m or y, or both); (b) is related
at least moderately to a measured cause of the
effect (e.g., is related to x in the functional
equation for m); and (c) is unmeasured—that
is, is not mcluded explicitly in the causal model
and the confirmatory analysis (James, 1980;
James et al., 1982). This is unfortunate because
a serious unmeasured variables problem precludes confirmatory analysis and the use of
causal inference to attempt to explain mediation processes (cf. Billings & Wroten, 1978;
Darlington, 1968; Duncan, 1970, 1975; James
et al., 1982; linn & Werts, 1969; Simon, 1952,
1953, 1977). In particular, confirmatory analytic techniques such as path analysis and
structural equation analysis should not be
used. If they are used, then, as shown in many
of the references above, estimates of causal
parameters and the ensuing causal inferences
will be biased.
It is also the case that procedures typically
associated with exploratory forms of analysis,
namely hierarchical OLS or partial correlation,
should not be employed in a confirmatory
mode to test causal hypotheses or to serve as
a basis for causal inference in the presence of
a serious unmeasured variables problem. On
the other hand, a serious unmeasured variables
problem does not preclude the use of hierarchical OLS or partial correlation in an exploratory mode as long as the results of the
hierarchical or partial correlation analysis are
interpreted in correlational terms with no
causal overtones. For example, an empirical
test of a model of the form m =/(x), y =f(m),
where the / s represent covariation and not
causal relations, may be based on a hierarchical
OLS and may show that R2^^ is not significantly greater than R2y. m. This indicates that
inclusion of x adds nothing to the prediction
ofy over that already furnished by m. It may
also be shown that R2y.mx is significantly
greater than R2y.x, which denotes that m adds
uniquely to the prediction of y in relation to
x. Such results support a correlational form
of mediation and an interpretation such as
"the covariation between x and y vanishes if
m is controlled." The results cannot be interpreted causally, such as m transmits causal
influence from x to y or serves to explain how
x and y are related, unless it can be assumed

that the mediation relations are not subject to
a serious unmeasured variables problem. Of
course, use of correlational forms of mediation
defeats the main purpose for developing and
testing mediation models (i.e., explanation)
and is the reason that most mediation models
are presented in the causal mode (Rozeboom,
1956).
Unfortunately, it is often the case in field
studies that causal mediation models with obvious misspecifications (i.e., unmeasured
variables, unanalyzed reciprocal causation)
have been subjected to goodness-of-fit tests using hierarchical OLS and/or partial correlation. In the context of present knowledge, these
tests should be regarded as exploratory tests
of correlational mediation hypotheses. Instead,
these tests have been interpreted as confirmatory tests of causal hypotheses and used to
make causal inferences. In effect, we have an
unwarranted intertwining of confirmatory and
exploratory procedures, which is evidenced by
such things as the use of beta weights from
the hierarchical OLS analyses as implicit path
coefficients (i.e., the weights are interpreted in
terms of importance and utility—cf. Darlington, 1968), the use of partial correlations that
tend to zero (by controlling on a mediator) as
evidence that an antecedent had no "direct
effect" on a consequence, and the use of a
significant increment in R2y.xm in relation to
R2y x to support a causal inference that the
"influence" of x on y is transmitted through
the mediator m. Remember also the example
presented in the introduction to this article,
where unmeasured variables would have to be
invoked to attempt to explain within-job variation in job perceptions and job satisfaction.
In sum, the models, analyses, and results
of many tests of mediation in the industrial
and organizational literature and the organizational behavior literature do not furnish sufficient evidence for the causal interpretations
offered in Discussion sections. It is recommended, therefore, that investigators begin to
devote attention to all of the conditions for
confirmatory analysis before conducting confirmatory tests on causal models and using the
results of these tests to support causal inferences. A review of the conditions for confirmatory analysis and causal inference is presented in James et al. (1982). If one or more
major sources of specification error is consid-

MEDIATION

319

ered viable, then use procedures such as hi- causal models and empirically demonstrated
erarchical OLS or partial correlation in the goodness of fit between models and data.
exploratory mode and limit discussion to cor- Specification errors, such as a serious unmearelational interpretations. On the other hand, sured variables problem or misspecified causal
if all sources of misspecification are considered, direction, preclude confirmatory analysis and
and no major misspecification is considered causal inference. Fifth, and finally, if causal
likely, then confirmatory analytic techniques models are well-specified, then confirmatory
such as path analysis and structural equation analytic techniques applicable to the model(s)
analysis should be used. This is because such of concern should be employed to furnish all
techniques furnish (a) a means to test causal relevant information (e.g., estimates of causal
hypotheses that cannot be addressed by cor- parameters, estimates of indirect effects, tests
relational techniques, such as reciprocal cau- of nonadditivity, etc.).
sation; (b) estimates of causal parameters; and
A full treatment of mediation requires con(c) a basis for estimating "indirect effects," a sideration of issues not addressed here. These
major concern in mediation analysis (cf. Grif- issues include (a) the use of the intervening
fin, 1977). To illustrate the last point, if a variable form of mediator in experimental
model of the form x —> m —» y is confirmed,analysis (MacCorquodale & Meehl, 1948;
then the path coefficient linking x to m (Pmx) Rozeboom, 1956) and exploratory factor
may be multiplied by the path coefficient link- analysis (Royce, 1963); (b) the use of "meing m t o j ' (pvm) or PmxPym. This product re- diating mechanisms" to develop theoretical
flects the magnitude of the indirect effect of rationales for causal hypotheses, whereby mex on y. There is no analogue of this procedure diating mechanism means a hypothetical mein hierarchical OLS or partial correlation. On diator that is not tested empirically (James et
the other hand, we are not suggesting that hi- al., 1982), and (c) micromediational processes,
erarchical OLS and partial correlation have which consist of mediating relations at a finer
no place in confirmatory analysis. These level of explanation than that of the model in
methods have limited applications in the con- question (e.g., at the level of receptor, neural,
firmatory mode (Cohen & Cohen, 1983), an or muscular mediating processes—Cook &
example being the prior use of hierarchical Campbell, 1979). Although important, these
OLS to test a portion of the causal hypotheses issues require a somewhat more esoteric preassociated with a nonadditive, complete me- sentation than the "applied" orientation of
diation model (see Figure 1). The point we this article.
wish to emphasize is that hierarchical OLS
and partial correlation should not be used in
place of confirmatory analytic methods.
References
Concluding Remarks
The following points were developed. First,
mediation is generally thought of in terms of
causal mediation, which connotes transmission of influences from antecedents to consequences and an attempt to explain how antecedents produce consequences. Second, mediation relations may assume any number of
functional forms, including nonadditive, nonlinear, and nonrecursive forms. Third, confirmatory analytic techniques furnish the most
informative tests of mediation. Fourth, there
is no middle ground between exploratory
(correlational) and confirmatory analysis. Attempts to explain how mediation processes
occur by causal inference require well-specified

Abrahams, N M , & Alf, E., Jr (1972) Pratfalls in moderator research Journal of Applied Psychology, 56,245251
Alwm, D E, &Hauser, R M (1975) The decomposition
of effects in path analysis American Sociological Review,
40, Zl-Al
Arnold, H J., & Feldman, D C (1982). A mulnvanate
analysis of the determinants of job turnover. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 67, 350-360.
Bandura,A (1977) Self-efficacy Toward a unifying theory
of behavioral change Psychological Review, 84, 191215
Bandura, A (1978) The self system in reciprocal determinism American Psychologist, 4, 344-358
Billings, R S,&Wroten,S P (1978) Use of path analysis
in industrial/organizational psychology Criticisms and
suggestions Journal of Applied Psychology, 63, 677688
Blalock, H M , Jr (1982) Conceptualization and measurement in the social sciences Beverly Hills, CA. Sage.
Brass, D J (1981). Structural relationships, job charac-

320

LAWRENCE R JAMES AND JEANNE M. BRETT

tenstics, and worker satisfaction and performance Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 331-348
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P (1983) Applied multiple regression/
correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.)
Hillsdale, NJ Eribaum
Cook, T D., & Campbell, D T (1979) Quasi-expenmentation Design and analysis issues for field settings
Chicago Rand McNally
Darlington, R B (1968) Multiple regression in psychological research and practice Psychological Bulletin, 69,
161-182
Duncan, O D. (1970) Partials, partitions, and paths In
E. F Borgatta & G W Bohrnstedt (Eds), Sociological
methodology (pp. 38-47) San Francisco Jossey-Bass
Duncan, O D (1975) Introduction to structural equation
models New York Academic Press
Goodstadt, B , & Kipms, D (1970) Situational influences
on the use of power Journal of Applied Psychology, 54,
201-207
Green, S G., & Mitchell, T R (1979) Attnbutional processes of leaders m leader-member interactions Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 23, 429458
Griffin, L J (1977) Causal modeling of psychological
success in work organizations Academy of Management
Journal, 20, 6-33
Gulhksen, H., & Wilks, S S (1950) Regression tests for
several samples Psychometnka, 15, 91-114
Heise, D R (1975) Causal analysis New York Wiley
Horn, P W, & Hulm, C L (1981) A competitive test of
the prediction of reenlistment by several models Journal
of Applied Psychology, 66, 23-39
Horn, P W, Katerberg, R , Jr, & Hulm, C L (1979)
Comparative examination of three approaches to the
prediction of turnover Journal of Applied Psychology,
64, 280-290
Ilgen, D R , & Knowlton, W A , Jr (1980) Performance
attnbutional effects on feedback from superiors Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25,
441-456
Ilgen,D R,Mitchell,T R.,&Frederickson,J W (1981)
Poor performers Supervisors' and subordinates' responses Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 27, 386-416
James, L R (1980) The unmeasured variable problem
in path analysis Journal ofApplied Psychology, 65, 415421
James, L R , & Jones, A P (1980) Perceived job characteristics and job satisfaction' An examination of reciprocal causation Personnel Psychology, 33, 97-135
James, L. R., Mulaik, S A , & Brett, J M (1982) Causal
analysis Assumptions, models, and data Beverly Hills,
CA Sage
James, L R , & Singh, K (1978) An introduction to the
logic, assumptions, and basic analytic procedures of
two-stage least squares Psychological Bulletin, 85, 11041122
Jones, S C. (1973) Self- and interpersonal evaluations
Esteem theories versus consistency theories Psychological Bulletin, 79, 185-199
Kenny, D A (1979) Correlation and causality New York
Wiley
Kim.J S (1980) Relationships of personality to perceptual
and behavioral responses in stimulating and nonstim-

ulating tasks Academy of Management Journal, 23,307319
Kipms, D., & Cosentmo, J (1969). Use of leadership powers in industry. Journal ofApplied Psychology, 53, 460466
Kipnis, D., Silverman, A , & Copeland, C. (1973). Effects
of emotional arousal on employees. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 57, 38-43
Knowlton, W A., Jr, & Mitchell, T R (1980) Effects of
causal attributions on a supervisor's evaluation of subordinate performance Journal of Applied Psychology,
65, 459-466
Linn, R L,&Werts,C E (1969) Assumptions in making
causal inferences from part correlations, partial correlations, and partial regression coefficients Psychological Bulletin, 72, 307-310
MacCorquodale,K.,&Meehl,P E (1948) Onadistmction
between hypothetical constructs and intervening variables Psychological Review, 55, 95-107
Maruyama, G , & McGarvey, B (1980) Evaluating causal
models An application of maximum-likelihood analysis
of structural equations Psychological Bulletin, 87, 502512
McFillen, J M (1978). Supervisory power as an influence
in supervisor-subordinate relations Academy of Management Journal, 21, 27-39
Miller, H E , Katerberg, R., & Hulm, C. L (1979) Evaluation of the Mobley, Horner, and Hollmgsworth model
of employee turnover Journal of Applied Psychology,
64, 509-517
Mitchell, T R , & Kalb, L S (1981) Effects of outcome
knowledge and outcome valence on supervisors' evaluations Journal of Applied Psychology, 66, 604-612
Mitchell, T R , & Wood, R E (1980) Supervisor's responses to subordinate poor performance A test of an
attnbutional model Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25, 123-138
Mobley, W H , Hand, H H , Baker, R L , & Meglino,
B M. (1979) Conceptual and empirical analysis of military recruit training attrition Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 10-18
Mobley, W H., Horner, S O, & Hollmgsworth, A T
(1978) An evaluation of precursors of hospital employee
turnover Journal of Applied Psychology, 63, 408-414
Namboodin, N K , Carter, L R , & Blalock, H M , Jr
(1975) Applied multivariate analysis and experimental
designs New \brk McGraw-Hill.
Oldham, G R , & H a c k m a n , J R (1981) Relationships
between organizational structure and employee reactions Companng alternative frameworks Administrative
Science Quarterly, 26, 66-83
O'Reilly, C A , ffl, Parlette, G N.,& Bloom, J R (1980)
Perceptual measures of task characteristics The biasing
effects of diffenng frames of reference andjob attitudes
Academy of Management Journal, 23, 118-131
Rousseau, D. M (1978a) Measures of technology as predictors of employee attitudes Journal of Applied Psychology, 63, 213-218
Rousseau, D M (1978b) Characteristics of departments,
positions, and individuals Context for attitudes and behavior Administrative Science Quarterly, 23, 521-540
Royce, J R (1963) Factors as theoretic constructs American Psychologist, 18, 522-528

321

MEDIATION
Rozeboom, W W. (1956). Mediation variables m scientific
theory Psychological Review, 63, 249-264
Schmitt, N , Coyle, B W, White, J K., & Rauschenberger,
J. (1978) Background, needs, job perceptions, and job
satisfaction A causal model. Personnel Psychology, 31,
889-901
Simon, H A (1952) On the definition of the causal relation Journal of Philosophy, 49, 517-528
Simon, H A (1953) Causal ordering and identifiabihty
In W. C Hood and T C Koopmans (Eds.), Studies in
econometric methods, (pp. 49-74) New 'Ybrk Wiley
Simon, H A (1977) Models of discovery Dordrecht, Holland R Reidel
Stolzenberg, R M. (1979) The measurement and decomposition of causal effects in nonlinear and nonadditive
models In K F Schuessler (Ed ), Sociological methodology 1980, (pp 459-488) San Francisco JosseyBass

Strotz, R H., & Wold, H O (1971) Recursive versus
nonrecursive systems An attempt at synthesis In
H M Blalock, Jr (Ed), Causal models in the social
sciences, (pp 179-189) Chicago Aldme-Atherton.
Sutton, R I , & Rousseau, D M. (1979) Structure, technology, and dependence on a parent organization Organizational and environmental correlates of individual
responses Journal of Applied Psychology; 64, 675-687.
Thomas, J , & Griffin, R (1983) The social information
processing model of task design A review of the literature Academy of Management Review, 8, 672-682.
Werner, B (1979) A theory of motivation of some classroom experience Journal of Educational Psychology,

7, 3-25
Received June 17, 1983
Revision received November 21, 1983

