Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment
Author(s): Lawrence F. Katz, Jeffrey R. Kling and Jeffrey B. Liebman
Source: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 2 (May, 2001), pp. 607-654
Published by: Oxford University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2696474
Accessed: 17-10-2019 15:57 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Oxford University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to The Quarterly Journal of Economics

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON: EARLY
RESULTS OF A RANDOMIZED MOBILITY EXPERIMENT*
LAwRENCE F. KATZ
JEFFREY R. KLING
JEFFREY B. LIEBMAN
We examine short-run impacts of changes in residential neighborhoods on the
well-being of families residing in high-poverty public housing projects who re-

ceived Section 8 housing vouchers through a random lottery. Households offered
vouchers experienced improvements in multiple measures of well-being relative to
a control group, including increased safety, improved health among household
heads, and fewer behavior problems among boys. There were no significant
short-run impacts of vouchers on the employment, earnings, or welfare receipt of
household heads. Children in households offered vouchers valid only in low
poverty neighborhoods also had reduced likelihood of injuries, asthma attacks,
and victimizations by crime.

I. INTRODUCTION

Poverty in the United States has become increasingly con-

centrated in high poverty areas. For example, between 1970 and
1990 the percentage of poor persons in metropolitan areas living
in census tracts with a poverty rate of 40 percent or more in-

creased from 12 percent to 18 percent [Jargowsky 1997]. Federal
housing policies which funded large high-rise public housing developments in central cities during the 1950s and 1960s [Von
Hoffman 1996] and which in the 1980s targeted assistance on the
poorest eligible households [Epp 1996] are likely to have contributed to this trend.
The concentration of poverty in inner cities, along with recent

increases in residential segregation by family income and the

* The authors thank the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Devel

ment, the National Institute on Aging, National Bureau of Economic Research,
and Harvard University for research support. The authors are grateful to Yvonne
Gastelum for collaborating on qualitative interviews in Spanish, Ying Qian for
conducting pilot survey interviews and for compiling family contact information,
Adriana Mendez for translating the survey into Spanish, Humberto Reynosa for
editing the Spanish translation, and to Patrick Wang, Beth Welty, and Lorin
Obler for excellent research assistance. We thank all of the members of the MTO
teams at MBHP, BHA, Abt, and Westat for making our research possible, and
Carol Luttrell for facilitating our access to administrative data. We have benefited
from conversations with numerous colleagues. We are particularly indebted to
Joshua Angrist, Deborah Belle, Xavier Briggs, Janet Currie, David Ellwood, Judie
Feins, Richard Frank, Edward Glaeser, John Goering, Christopher Jencks, Ron
Kessler, Alan Krueger, Edward Lazear, Willard Manning, Joseph Newhouse,
Larry Orr, Michael Piore, James Rebitzer, Marta Tienda, Julie Wilson, Aaron
Yelowitz, and three anonymous referees for their suggestions.

? 2001 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute
Technology.

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001

607

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

608 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

persistence of residential segregation by race in U. S. metropoli-

tan areas [Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 1999; Jargowsky 1996],
has potentially disturbing implications because of evidence that
residential neighborhoods are associated with both the current

well-being and future opportunities of residents. In particular,
children who grow up in poor neighborhoods fare substantially
worse on a wide variety of outcomes than those who grow up with
more affluent neighbors even in studies that include detailed
controls for family income and background characteristics (e.g.,
Brooks-Gunn et al. [1993]).

Many analysts conclude from such findings that residential
location greatly affects access to opportunity through peer influences on youth behavior and through a variety of neighborhood

characteristics correlated with neighborhood wealth-such as
school quality and safety from crime. The willingness of families

to pay substantial house price and rental premiums to move to

wealthier neighborhoods and gain access to better schools
strongly suggests that typical citizens believe that neighborhood

and school social composition affect their children's life pros-

pects.1 Furthermore, assumptions of causal neighborhood and
peer effects are central to theories of social capital [Coleman

1988] and to models of human capital externalities and growth

[Benabou 1993; Lucas 1988], and are often used to justify government provision of housing assistance rather than unrestricted

cash grants for low-income families [Quigley 1980].
Although existing empirical studies and the perceptions and

actions of parents are suggestive of the importance of neighborhoods, the estimation of the causal effects of neighborhoods is

fraught with difficulties.2 Observed differences in youth outcomes
by type of neighborhood could reflect unmeasured differences in
family background. The reduction in the magnitude of estimated
neighborhood effects when detailed controls for family background are included suggests that with even better controls estimates of neighborhood effects might be further reduced [Corcoran
et al. 1992].3 But the difficulty of measuring neighborhood at1. Black [19991 provides convincing evidence of parents' willingness to pay for
higher public school quality by comparing house prices for comparable homes in
the same neighborhoods on different sides of the borders between adjacent elementary school attendance districts for suburban areas in Massachusetts.
2. See Duncan, Connell, and Klebanov [1997], Jencks and Mayer [1990], and
Manski 11993] for detailed discussions of conceptual and practical issues in the
estimation of neighborhood effects.
3. Recent research has attempted to better control for family background and

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 609

tributes and of defining appropriate peer groups may lead to
underestimates of neighborhood and peer influences.

These estimation problems would be greatly reduced if we

could compare the outcomes of children from truly comparable
families growing up in different types of neighborhoods. The ideal
evaluation design would be the random assignment of families of
interest to different neighborhoods. Housing mobility programs
in which some low-income inner-city families are given assistance
in moving to less-segregated, wealthier, or suburban locations

can approximate such a design if access to such assistance is
randomly assigned. The Gautreaux program, which has operated
in the Chicago metropolitan area since 1976, is suggestive of the
potential of learning about neighborhood influences from housing

mobility programs.4 Quasi-experimental comparisons of the
household heads and the children of a sample of suburban and
urban movers in the program suggest that moving to the suburbs
greatly increased youth educational attainment and labor market
outcomes and modestly improved mothers' employment rates rel-

ative to moving to other parts of the city [Rosenbaum 1995].5
The promising findings from the Gautreaux program helped

to better address the issue of selectivity of residential location within a metropolitan area (MSA). Aaronson [1998] examines families that relocate and compares siblings who grow up in different neighborhoods. Aaronson finds substantial
negative effects of neighborhood high-school dropout rates on individual dropout
rates in sibling difference models. But differences in sibling outcomes could reflect
changes in family circumstances driving residential moves. Cutler and Glaeser

[19971 compare outcomes for black and white youths across MSAs by the extent of

racial residential segregation without conditioning on residential location within
an MSA and find substantially lower relative socioeconomic outcomes for black

youth in more segregated MSAs. Currie and Yelowitz [20001 argue that the
correlation between living in a public housing project and poor outcomes may be
spurious. They use an instrumental variables estimation strategy (where some
families are quasi-randomly entitled to a larger unit based on the sex composition
of their children) and find that boys in project households are less likely to have
been held back in school.
4. The Gautreaux program resulted from a Supreme Court consent decree in
a racial discrimination lawsuit against the Clhicago Housing Authority and the
U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) filed on behalf of
Chicago public housing residents. It provided low-income blacks originally residing in Chicago public housing with special housing certificates and assistance to
move to neighborhoods in which the black population has a share of less than 30
percent, both in the suburbs and in other parts of the city of Chicago.
5. Although the Gautreaux findings are quite suggestive, they are far from
definitive. First, it remains unclear the extent to which the residential locations
(suburban versus urban) of Gautreaux participants approximated random assignment. It is possible that substantial unobserved differences in the families moving
to the suburbs and to other parts of central city Chicago could bias the findings.
And the very small sample of Gautreaux families who are interviewed by survey
researchers some years later may be unrepresentative in ways that could have
influenced research findings.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

610 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

motivate the development by HUD of an experimental housing
mobility program that explicitly uses random assignment. This
Moving to Opportunity (MTO) demonstration has been operating
in five cities-Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New
York-since the fall of 1994. Families were eligible for participa-

tion in the demonstration if they had children and resided in

public housing or project-based Section 8 assisted housing in
census tracts with a 1990 poverty rate of 40 percent or more.
Interested eligible families who completed an application and

survey were then selected from a waiting list and randomly
assigned to one of three program groups: the Experimental group,
the Section 8 Comparison group, and the Control group [Feins et

al. 1994]. Families in the Experimental group received a restricted housing voucher that could be used to help pay for rental
housing from private landlords, but only in a low poverty area (a

census tract with under a 10 percent poverty rate in 1990). The
Experimental group families also received counseling assistance
from a local nonprofit organization to help them search for an

apartment and adjust to a new neighborhood. Section 8 Comparison group members received a geographically unrestricted
housing voucher and no counseling assistance. The Control group

families did not receive rental assistance vouchers, although their
eligibility for continued project-based assistance was unaffected.
The Experimental and Section 8 Comparison group members

were given four to six months to submit a request for approval of
an eligible apartment they wanted to lease using a housing
voucher, and the apartment then had to pass a quality inspection.

By randomly assigning assistance in moving to wealthier
neighborhoods, the MTO demonstration provides a unique oppor-

tunity both to assess the effectiveness of using housing mobility
programs to move families to these neighborhoods and to measure the causal impacts of neighborhood attributes on family and
youth outcomes for poor families. It also provides for a direct
comparison of the two major forms of housing assistance for U. S.
low-income families: project-based assistance and tenant-based
assistance.

In this paper we provide a comprehensive evaluation of the
early impacts of the MTO demonstration on family well-being at
the Boston site (measured about two years after program entry).

We exploit the random-assignment design to produce these estimates through comparisons of the outcomes of the Experimental
and Section 8 Comparison groups with those of the Control group.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 611

Our analysis combines information from field observations of
the program, qualitative interviews with participants, baseline
survey responses, responses to a follow-up survey of 520 MTO-

Boston participants, data on Census tract characteristics linked
to geocoded initial and current addresses of participants, and
Massachusetts administrative data on earnings and public assistance receipt.

We begin in Section II by discussing the mechanisms through
which changes in residential neighborhoods may affect human
capital accumulation, economic self-sufficiency, and current family well-being. In Section III we provide a more detailed description of the operation of MTO in Boston. We find that fear of crime

was the primary reason participants wanted to move out of public
housing at all five MTO sites.6 In Section IV we present our
econometric framework for analyzing neighborhood effects, and

discuss the interpretation of parameters that can be estimated
from the MTO experiment. In Section V we analyze mobility
outcomes for the Boston families. We find that approximately 48
percent of the MTO group moved to private housing using the
MTO vouchers as compared with 62 percent of the Section 8
Comparison group. Although the Experimental and Section 8
groups experienced similarly large positive effects on average
neighborhood quality as measured by many census-tract characteristics, these averages mask important differences in the mobility patterns between the two treatment groups. Fewer Experimental group families managed to move out of their high-poverty
origin neighborhoods, but those that did were much more likely
than families in the Section 8 group to end up in suburban,
low-poverty neighborhoods.
We present our main substantive findings in three groupings.
In Section VI we analyze the impact of the program on children's
human capital development as proxied by measures of child behavior and health. We find that the program led to a decline in
behavior problems among boys in both the Experimental and
Section 8 Comparison groups, but has no discernible impact on
girls' behavior problems. The Experimental group children also

6. Our qualitative interviews with Boston participants strongly reinforce this
conclusion and indicate substantial concerns of these public housing residents
with protecting themselves and their children from possibly arbitrary outbursts of
violence. Kling, Liebman, and Katz [2001] provide a more detailed presentation of
the findings from our qualitative interviews on participants' perceptions of their
neighborhoods.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

612 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

experienced fewer injuries and asthma attacks. In Section VII we
examine adult economic self-sufficiency using data on welfare
participation and employment, and find insignificant differences

between the three MTO groups. Finally, in Section VIII we examine other factors affecting family quality of life, including
safety, adult health, and adult social interactions. We find large
improvements in neighborhood safety and in adult health for both
MTO treatment groups. Section IX concludes.

II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

The MTO demonstration facilitates moves by members of the

treatment groups out of public housing to areas with more affluent neighbors and a lower incidence of many social problems. We
are particularly interested in the impacts of such residential
moves on child human capital accumulation and adult economic
outcomes. In addition, we examine impacts of moves on safety
and adult mental health both because these variables are likely to
have long-run effects on child outcomes and because they are
components of current family well-being.

Neighborhoods may affect the human capital accumulation of
children through peer influences, adult influences, and community resources [Jencks and Mayer 1990]. Many child behaviorsincluding educational choices, crime, and other delinquent behavior-are likely to exhibit positive social interactions in which the
net private benefits from pursuing an activity rise with the share

of one's peers who pursue the activity. Positive social interactions
(or contagion effects) can arise from learning from peers, pure
preference externalities (individuals enjoy imitating their peers),

stigma effects (the negative signal from delinquent behaviors
declines when more people do them), and physical externalities

(e.g., higher crime rates reduce the chances of getting arrested
because of congestion effects in law enforcement).7 Adults in a
neighborhood may also influence young people who are not their
7. See Glaeser and Scheinkman [1999], Brock and Durlauf [2000], Manski
[2000], and Moffitt [2000] for reviews of theories of social interactions and peer
influences. Case and Katz [1991], Evans, Oates, and Schwab [1992], and Gaviria
and Raphael [19991 have used nonexperimental methods to estimate peer effects
on youth behaviors. Sacerdote [2001] uses a compelling quasi-experiment-the
random assignment of roommates at Dartmouth College-to estimate peer effects

on the academic performance and social behaviors of college students. Ludwig,
Duncan, and Hirschfield [20011 present experimental evidence suggesting youth
socialized in high-poverty neighborhoods may reduce their delinquency rate if
their family moves through MTO at the Baltimore site.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 613

children through human capital externalities [Borjas 1995] and

by acting as role models or enforcers of public order [Wilson
1987]. The higher quality schools, better labor market opportu-

nities, and greater community resources (e.g., recreational activities) of more affluent neighborhoods may increase the perceived
returns to educational investments relative to delinquent behaviors. These theories suggest that moves to more affluent commu-

nities through MTO have the potential to enhance human capital

development and reduce child problem behaviors.8
Adult economic self-sufficiency-employment and welfare
participation-may also be affected by residential location. Spatial mismatch models [Kain 1968] suggest that moves from innercity neighborhoods to suburban neighborhoods should increase

access to employment opportunities leading to higher adult employment rates and lower welfare usage. Community norms in

low-poverty areas are likely to be more supportive of work and
less accepting of welfare than those in public housing projects.
But relocations could-at least in the short run-disrupt social
support networks that are important sources of informal child
care, job referrals, and other labor market information. The over-

all effect of moves to low-poverty areas on employment is ambiguous in the short run but likely to become more positive over
time as movers form new social networks; similarly, the impact of
the program on welfare usage might be expected to rise over time.
Moves to new locations may result in important direct improvements in quality of life. Families moving out of high-poverty

public housing to more affluent areas should experience improved
neighborhood safety and possibly improved housing conditions.
Our fieldwork strongly suggests such changes are likely to be

associated with reductions in parental stress and anxiety.9 Effects on mental health from improvements in safety could be

offset, however, by social isolation in a new location.

8. Relative deprivation models in which children judge their success or failure by comparing themselves with others around them have the opposite prediction. Poor children competing against more affluent and academically betterprepared peers may become frustrated, reduce effort in school, and become more
likely to engage in deviant behaviors.
9. Moreover, improvements in safety and in mother's mental health may
have positive effects on child human capital accumulation. In fact, a large literature suggests positive impacts of maternal mental health on parenting and
child outcomes [Weissman et al. 1984; Gelfand et al. 19901.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

614 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

111. MTO IN BOSTON

The MTO demonstration program presents an exciting op-

portunity to identify credibly the causal effects of a housing
mobility program (and of neighborhoods) on a wide range of

outcomes. Nonetheless, it is important to be explicit about the
nature of the specific interventions that occurred at the Boston
MTO site.
A. The Program
Each household assigned to the Experimental and Section 8

Comparison groups was issued a housing voucher that they could

use to help pay the rent for an apartment in the private market.10
The average value of this voucher was approximately $700 per
month. Both treatment groups received briefings from HUD staff

about program rules and about how to look for an apartment at
the time of voucher issuance. The net cost of counseling in the

Experimental group was $1827 per household [Goering et al.
19991.
The Experimental group members were also assigned a counselor from a local nonprofit (the Metropolitan Boston Housing
Partnership, or MBHP). The counselors made home visits to
review housing search strategies, explained which neighborhoods

the vouchers could be used in (providing a map marked with
low-poverty Census tracts), helped program participants clear up

bad credit histories, found apartment listings in newspapers,
provided references to landlords, and sometimes drove partici10. Note that we use the term "housing voucher" as a generic term for the
subsidies offered through MTO. One-third of these subsidies were Section 8
certificates, where recipients made a fixed contribution (usually 30 percent of
their adjusted income, or .3AI) toward their rent, and the local housing authority
paid the difference between this contribution and the unit rent up to a prespecified
payment standard (PS). Two-thirds were Section 8 vouchers, where the housing
authority set the subsidy size (usually PS - .3AI) and allowed recipients to choose
their rental payment within a range. These two subsidy types were eventually
merged in 1999. The PS varied by bedroom size, and were based on a percentile
(lowered from the forty-fifth to the fortieth in 1995) of the rent level in the
metropolitan area; the Boston metropolitan area included most of the city and
suburban residential locations of MTO-Boston program moves, while separate
rent levels were calculated for Brockton, Lowell, and other surrounding cities. Use
of a housing voucher required that a unit pass inspection. Material distributed to
MTO families described the inspector's job was to "make sure that the apartment
has enough windows, electric lights, and electrical outlets; is well ventilated; has
enough space for the people who will be living there; has two ways to get in and
out; and is in good condition." In general, households can retain this voucher as
long as they demonstrate good conduct and their income is sufficiently low. For
example, the voucher would be terminated if .3A1 > PS for six consecutive
months.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 615

pants to see promising apartments. Thus, the counselors played a
very large role in determining the destination communities of the

Experimental group members."
The impact of this complex treatment may also have been

affected by features of the Boston housing and labor markets
during the period of study and by some changes in government
policies that impacted the participating families. In particular,
both housing vacancy rates and unemployment rates in the Boston area were very low (and falling) during the period of the

study. In our qualitative interviews, we found that actual and
potential changes to welfare rules and to Section 8 produced
substantial anxiety among the MTO population. There was also a
major change to Section 8 in the middle of MTO. For the first
time, Section 8 landlords were permitted to require security deposits from prospective tenants. There were also major improvements during the study in the safety of some of the developments
from which MTO families came.
B. The Data

Qualitative fieldwork. Our fieldwork included observing the
administration of the baseline survey, attending intake sessions
for families after randomization, accompanying counselors on
home visits, and interviewing program staff. We also held twelve
90-minute open-ended interviews with MTO household heads in
the Experimental and Section 8 Comparison groups. The interviews covered the participants' experiences with the program,
and their perceptions of their old and new (if they moved) neighborhoods.'2 This information was gathered to help understand

what was going on inside the "black box" of the MTO treatments
and to generate new hypotheses.
Surveys. We use data from two surveys. First, each household head completed a survey prior to enrollment in the MTO
11. Participants were urged to assemble recommendations from past landlords and from neighbors saying that the participants were good tenants and that
their children were not troublemakers. In some cases, MBHP provided small
grants to households to enable them to purchase furniture or appliances for the
new apartment. The counselors made at least one home visit in the year after the
move to each family that leased up. Counselors sometimes resolved problems that

arose for the participants in their new neighborhoods. For example, they mediated
disputes between the participants and their landlords, and on a few occasions
helped families deal with incidents of racial discrimination.
12. The qualitative interviews took place in the respondents' homes, and
were tape recorded. Interviews in English were jointly conducted by Kling and

Liebman. Interviews in Spanish were conducted by Liebman and Yvonne
Gastelum.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

616 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

program, which we refer to as the "MTO Baseline Survey," which
is available for households at all five MTO sites. Second, we
conducted our own survey, which we refer to as the "MTO-Boston
Follow-up Survey." The main sampling frame for the data used in
this study consisted of household heads randomly assigned in the
MTO program in Boston between October 1994 and May 1996.
Over these 20 months, 540 families were enrolled; new cohorts

were assigned approximately once a month, for an average of 27
families per month. During June and July of 1997, we completed
340 interviews by telephone. Between November 1997 and April
1998, we completed an additional 180 interviews in person, for an

overall survey response rate of 96.3 percent.13 Although MTO
continued to enroll families in Boston throughout 1996-1997, we
limited our sample to families who had had up to 120 days to find
a new residence and then at least nine months to have lived in the

new residence at the time our interviews began. The monthly

enrollments of new families and the different survey completion
dates yield an average time between random assignment and the

MTO-Boston Follow-up Survey of 2.2 years, with a range from 1
to 3.5 years. Survey data on residential addresses were geocoded,

and we merged them with the STF files of the 1990 Census of
Population to describe the attributes of the neighborhoods of
MTO families.

Administrative records. Our primary source of information
for assessing welfare and employment impacts in the Experimental and Section 8 Comparison groups are extracts from the Massachusetts Department of Revenue's Longitudinal Data Base.
The data on monthly welfare (AFDC/TANF) receipt from 1991-

1998 originated with the Massachusetts Department of Transitional Assistance. Quarterly earnings data are based on informa-

tion from employer filings with the Massachusetts Department of

13. The survey was written by our research team and administered in mixed
modes (by telephone and in-person) by Westat Inc. The survey was administered
in both Spanish and English. The interviewers were not told about the treatment

group assignment of individuals. The complete survey is available at http://
www.wws.princeton.edu/kling. We were unable to complete interviews with
twenty household heads. In thirteen of these cases we located the household, but
were unable to complete an interview because the sample member was deceased,
avoided our interviewer, or refused to be interviewed. In seven cases we did not

locate the household head, although in five of those cases we were in touch with
friends or family members of the household head, and might ultimately have been
able to locate the household head or other members of the MTO household with
additional efforts.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 617
TABLE I
MTO BASELINE SURVEY DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF HOUSEHOLDS IN FIVE CITIES

Baltimore Boston Chicago L.A. N.Y. All
If female household head .98 .92 .96 .81 .93 .91
If

If

Black

.97

Hispanic

.37

.02

.99

.46

.52

.01

.50

.45

.49

.64

.32

Main reason to move:

Drugs,

gangs

.55

.54

.51

.60

.48

.53

Better apartment .26 .29 .18 .13 .26 .22
Better

schools

.12

.09

.24

.23

.19

.18

In the past 6 months a

householder has been:
Beaten or assaulted .25 .17 .25 .27 .26 .24

Stabbed or shot .12 .08 .12 .13 .12 .11
Sample size 637 961 895 1034 1081 4608
Authors' calculations using the October 1999 extract of the MTO Data System, containing data on all
program enrollments (October 1994-July 1998).

Revenue.'4 An advantage of these data sources in comparison to
our survey is that we can construct a panel of quarterly observations from the beginning of 1992 through the third quarter of
1998.15

C. Characteristics of MTO Families
As shown in Table I, the participants in all five MTO sites are

largely female-headed households. The participants in Baltimore
and Chicago are almost entirely African-American. The Boston,
Los Angeles, and New York sites have more ethnically diverse

groups of participants with over 40 percent Hispanics. According
to the Baseline Survey at the time of program enrollment, the
main reason a majority of families (53 percent) wanted to move is
fear of crime ("to get away from drugs and gangs"). Table I also
14. Note that these data from tax records included reports from all employers
in the state, which is broader coverage than the Unemployment Insurance records
often used in research. By definition, administrative records do not capture
"off-the-books" or illegal earnings. However, some research has shown that the
undermeasurement appears to be symmetric across treatment and control groups

in the national JTPA evaluation [Kornfeld and Bloom 19991, suggesting that

differences between MTO groups may not be biased by this omission.
15. This was constructed primarily by matching on Social Security Number
(SSN). Names and birth dates were also used to find additional matches and

validate the SSN matches; this refinement affected less than 1 percent of the
quarterly observations.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

618 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

reports that improvements in housing ("to get a bigger or better
apartment") and school quality ("better schools for my children")
were the next most important factors motivating moves. Employment concerns ("to get a job" or "to be near my job") were listed as
the main reason to move by less than 2 percent of all participants.
In contrast to the emphasis on crime as a motivation for wanting

to move among current public housing residents in high poverty
areas, participants in the Gautreaux housing mobility program in
the late 1970s [Peroff et al. 1979, p. 114] indicated that good
schools (34 percent) and quality of housing (26 percent) were

more important considerations than crime (23 percent). The increased concern about crime among inner-city public housing
residents likely reflects the increase in violent crime rates that

occurred in many urban areas over this time period. The concern
about crime may also have been the direct result of having been
victimized recently. Across all five sites, 24 percent of the household heads indicated that someone who lives with them had been

beaten or assaulted in the past six months, and 11 percent had
had someone stabbed or shot. The reported victimization rates of

MTO families are about four times higher than those computed

from a recent national survey of public housing households in
family developments reported in Zelon et al. [1994].16
In comparison to other tenants in the same public housing

development in which the MTO families lived, Goering et al.
[1999] found that MTO and non-MTO households were very
similar in household size and in number of children under
eighteen. MTO households (pooling across all five sites) were
more likely to be female-headed (93 percent versus 78 percent),
receiving AFDC (75 percent versus 51 percent), not working
(88 percent versus 70 percent), and younger (median age 33
versus 39).

Table II presents a list of characteristics of the 540 Boston
households that are the focus of our analysis, as reported by the
household head in the Baseline Survey. The majority of these
families are headed by a single mother who receives public assistance. Twenty-seven percent of the household heads were employed at the time of the baseline survey, and 22 percent own an
16. Victimization rates may be somewhat exaggerated in the Baseline Survey. Despite instructions that the survey was being conducted by outside researchers and that the housing authority would not receive copies of individual
responses, our fieldwork revealed that some respondents assumed their answers
could influence program acceptance.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 619
TABLE II
MTO-BOSTON BASELINE SURVEY DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
OF HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
A. Households

Head's

age

is

19-29

.30

Head's

age

is

30-39

.46

Head's

age

is

40-49

.18

Head

Head

is

is

Black

Head
Head

has

Hispanic

and

is

non-Hispanic

female

never

been

.4

.37

.91

married

.59

Family

size

is

2

.23

Family

size

is

3

.35

Family

size

is

4

.22

All household children are ages 0-12 .58
Any householder was robbed, assaulted, or threatened with a weapon .29
within past 6 months

Any

householder

Head

is

is

currently

disabled

.14

working

.27

Head is currently receiving AFDC/TANF .64
Head is currently enrolled in school .17

Head

is

Head
Head

high
is

has

school

GED
a

car

graduate

recipient
that

runs

.43
.24
.22

Head has moved 3+ times in past 5 years .10

Head has no friends in neighborhood .42
Head has no family in neighborhood .69
Census tract poverty rate is less than 40% .20
Census tract poverty rate is greater than 43% .32
B. Children
Boys Girls

Problems that require special medicine or equipment .17 .06
Problems that make it hard to get to school or to play active .08 .06
sports or games

Special help for learning problems during past 2 years .22 .14
Special help for behavioral or emotional problems during past .10 .04
2 years

Suspended or expelled from school during past 2 years .06 .03
School asked someone about problems at school during past .25 .16
2 years

Goes to special class for gifted students or does advanced work .14 .11
in any subjects
Means are weighted, as discussed in Section III. Missing Baseline Survey data are imputed to the mean
of nonmissing observations. In panel A, sample size is 540 households. For age, the omitted category is 50+;
for family size, the omitted category is 5+. In panel B, sample is based on up to two randomly selected
children per household age 6-15. Sample size is 296 boys (from 253 households) and 316 girls (from 268
households).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

620 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

automobile. These patterns are not surprising given that eligibility for the program was restricted to families with children living
in public housing (or project-based assisted housing) in high
poverty, inner-city census tracts.
Under random assignment to one of three groups in MTO,
the Baseline Survey characteristics should be the same on aver-

age across the groups except for variation due to sampling. Using
the 24 characteristics in panel A of Table II, we find that only
three of the 48 differences between the control group and the two

treatment groups have a p-value of less than .05; this pattern is
quite consistent with a successful implementation of random

assignment.17 One additional factor when comparing groups is
that the randomization proportions were changed after the first
450 households were randomly assigned; all statistics we report

are therefore weighted to account for this change.18
IV. ECONOMETRIC FRAMEWORK

The theories of neighborhood effects discussed in Section II
posit a relationship between neighborhood characteristics (such
as school quality or role models) and outcomes (such as educational achievement). In a simple regression framework, the most
direct test of these theories would be to examine the coefficient

vector (81) in a regression of the outcome of interest (Y) on a set
of neighborhood characteristics (W), conditioning on controls for
individual background variables (X) with i indexing households:
(1) Yi = Wiel + Ximl + aati1

There are two reasons, however, why estimates of equation (1) on
17. A test of the joint significance of the 48 differences has an F-statistic of
1.2 with a p-value of .21, indicating no significant differences between the groups.
Means of baseline characteristics for each of the three MTO groups are presented
in Table 1 of Katz, Kling, and Liebman [20001.
18. For the computation of all descriptive statistics and econometric esti-

mates in this paper, the data are weighted. For the earlier 450 sample households,

the Exp:Sec8:Control random assignment ratio was 225:85:140. For the later 90
households, after March 1996, the ratio was 15:35:40. The randomization proportions were adjusted after it became apparent that more Experimental families and
fewer Section 8 Comparison families were taking up the offered voucher than had
been projected. We weight the data under these two randomization proportions to
reflect the overall sample ratio of 240:120:180, or 4:2:3. For example, there are
relatively fewer Control households in the earlier period than in the overall

sample, so these observations are upweighted by (180/540)/(140/450) 1.07.

Thus, using the weights allow us to abstract from this change and address the
counterfactual question of what our results would look like if the randomization
probabilities had remained constant throughout our time period at the overall
sample ratio.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 621

standard nonexperimental cross-section (and panel) data sets are

unlikely to provide convincing tests of theories of neighborhood
effects. First, the selection problem arising from the systematic
sorting of individuals among neighborhoods on the basis of important unobserved determinants of socioeconomic outcomes may

bias results from equation (1). Second, it can be quite difficult to
measure the characteristics of neighborhoods that theories sug-

gest should be important, potentially leading to attenuation biases from measurement error. For example, data on peer influ-

ences are difficult to collect, and the neighborhood variables in
standard data sets (usually at the census tract or block group
level) may not correspond to the relevant neighborhood concept.
These measurement problems are compounded since many neigh-

borhood characteristics are highly correlated with each other,
making it difficult to parse out their separate contributions.
To identify the causal effect of residential location on an

outcome of interest, we must compare people living in different
locations who would have experienced the same outcome, at least
on average, if they had lived in the same location. Since people
cannot be located in two places at once, this comparison neces-

sarily involves a counterfactual that cannot be directly observed.
In our analysis of the MTO program, we study safety, health, and

other outcomes for families originally living in public housing
who were offered a housing voucher to defray their rental pay-

ments in a privately owned apartment. We then compare the
average outcomes of these treatment-group families to a Control
group originally living in the same public housing projects, but
who were not offered the voucher. The key to this analysis is that
the offer of the voucher is randomly assigned by lottery. Thus, the
Control group is used to identify the average outcomes corresponding to the counterfactual state that would have occurred for
families in the treatment group if they had not been offered a
housing voucher through the lottery. This analysis does not allow
us to identify the specific neighborhood characteristics that produce the change in outcome. Instead, it measures the average
causal effect of moves to neighborhoods with entire bundles of
different characteristics than the public housing projects of

origin.
To formalize our analysis, let D be an indicator variable for
use of a housing voucher to move through the MTO program, or
treatment take-up. Let Z (with coefficient Tr2) be an indicator
variable for being eligible for an MTO program voucher, or treat-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

622 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

ment group assignment. Let -r be the other determinants of
voucher use, which is determined as in equation (2):

(2) Di'= Zir2 + 2iThe difference in outcomes between the treatment and con-

trol group are known as "Intent-to-Treat" (ITT) effect, and is

captured by the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimate of the
coefficient '3 in a regression of the outcome (Y) on an indicator for
assignment (Z) to a treatment or control group as in equation (3):

(3) Yi- Zirr3 + ?3iITT is an average of the causal effects for those who take up the
treatment and those who do not.

The characteristics known prior to randomization (X) should
have the same distribution within the treatment and control
groups because they are statistically independent of group assignment. Thus, including them in a regression like (3) will not
change the coefficient i-3 (unless X happens to differ between
groups due to the variability in a small sample). Xs may still be
included to improve the precision of the treatment effect estimates, however, if they are related to Y and thereby reduce
residual variation in the regression, as in equation (4):

(4) Yif= Zir4 + Xi34 + ?4iThe ITT estimate tells us the impact of being offered the opportunity to move with a MTO voucher. From the perspective of a

policy maker designing a policy that would offer a similar voucher
to a similar population, this parameter is directly of interest.
However, from the perspective of the neighborhood effects
literature, it is also desirable to have an estimate of the impact of
actually moving to a new neighborhood, rather than simply of
being offered the opportunity to move. Under several assumptions (treatment group assignment is random; Control group
members are prohibited from receiving program voucher assistance; the effect on outcomes of treatment assignment works
entirely through making a subsidized move through the pro-

gram'9), we can use treatment assignment as an instrumental
19. This assumption says that those who did not accept the treatment offer
had no average treatment effect in comparison to those who would not have
accepted the treatment if it had been offered to them. For the Experimental group,
this assumption implies that the later outcomes of households who met with a
housing mobility counselor were not affected by the counselor if that household
did not make a subsidized move through the MTO program. For both treatment

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 623

variable to estimate the parameter commonly known as "the
effect of Treatment-on-Treated" (TOT). The TOT parameter measures the average effect of the treatment on those in the treat-

ment group who actually receive the treatment (i.e., who actually
move using a Section 8 rental voucher provided by the MTO

program). One estimate of TOT is 1T311T2, or the ITT divided by the
proportion receiving the treatment.20 We use an alternative esti-

mate, the parameter Y5 from a two-stage least squares (2SLS)
regression of Y on D with Z used as an instrumental variable for
D, as in equation (5):

(5) Yi = DiY5 + Xi45 + F5ij

The 2SLS estimate of Y5 in (5) is a regression-adjusted estimate of
TOT, using the information in X to obtain additional statistical
precision, and is asymptotically equivalent to the unadjusted
indirect least squares estimate of TOT, 1-r3/1T2.
There are two treatment groups in this application, so we will
compute separate estimates for both the Experimental and Section 8 Comparison groups by making D and Z matrices of two
indicator variables for these groups. In this research we will stack
data for all three MTO groups and present regression-adjusted
ITT and TOT estimates based, respectively, on OLS estimates of
(4) and on 2SLS estimates of (5), using treatment group assignments as instrumental variables for housing voucher use through
the program.

Conceptually, the TOT is the estimated difference in outcomes between those who actually use the rental voucher
through the program and those in the Control group who would
have used the voucher if it had been offered to them. Among

those assigned to a treatment group, we refer to those who
decide to take up the offered voucher as "compliers" and those
who decide not to take up the offered voucher as "never takers,"

groups, this assumption implies that the experience of housing search induced by
assignment to a treatment group did not affect later outcomes if that household
did not make a subsidized program move. We believe that this assumption is not
strictly true, but we also believe that effects of mobility counselors and of housing
search on outcomes such as child behavior, victimization, or health for those who
did not make a subsidized move through the program are likely to be an order of
magnitude smaller than the effects of moving to a new residential location.
20. The use of this deflator based on the proportion in the treatment group
who actually received the treatment was introduced in the program evaluation
context by Bloom [1984]; see Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith [1999] for a comprehensive discussion of alternative parameters of interest in the evaluation of social
programs.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

624 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE III
DEFINITIONS OF COMPLIERS AND NEVER TAKERS
All Complier (C = 1) Never Taker (C = 0)
Offered "Treatment Group" "Treatment Compliers" "Treatment Never Takers"

Treatment E[YIZ = 11 E[YIC = 1, Z = 11 E[YIC = 0, Z = 11
(Z = 1) Sample mean Sample mean Sample mean observed.
observed. observed.

In MTO, offered a In MTO, offered a In MTO, offered a

voucher in the voucher and used it voucher, but did not use
lottery. to move through it to move through
program. program.

Not Offered "Control Group" "Control Compliers" "Control Never Takers"

Treatment E[YIZ = 0] EIYIC = 1, Z = 0] EtYIC = 0, Z = 0]
(Z = 0) Sample mean Sample mean not Sample mean not
observed. observed. observed.

In MTO, not In MTO, not offered a In MTO, not offered a
offered a voucher-but would voucher-and would not
voucher in the have used it to move have used it to move
lottery. through program if through program if
offered. offered.

following a literature on treatment effect estimation.21 Table
III summarizes the relationship between compliers and never
takers in the treatment and control groups. As before, let Y be
an outcome, let D be an indicator of program voucher use, and
let Z be an indicator of treatment group assignment by lottery.

Now, let C refer to potential compliance with the treatment.
Potential compliance is observed in the treatment group (C = D
when Z = 1), but not observed in the control group. Thus,
"Control Compliers" (C = 1, Z = 0) do not receive the treatment,
but they would have accepted the treatment if it had been
offered to them. Similarly, "Control Never Takers" (C = 0,
Z = 0) would not have accepted the treatment if it had been
offered to them.

Using this notation, we can more precisely define the Intentto-Treat (ITT) and Treatment-on-Treated effects (TOT). ITT is
E[YjZ = 11 - E[YjZ = 0]. TOT is E[YjC = 1, Z = 1] - E[YjC =
1, Z = 0]. To assess the magnitude of the TOT effect in relative
as well as in absolute terms, it is useful to have a benchmark level
of the outcome in the absence of treatment for comparison. In
21. For example, see Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin [1996]. In their terminology
there are no "always takers" or "defiers" in this application because no one in the
Control group is offered a voucher through the MTO program.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 625

equation (6) we use the mean outcome for treated compliers and
the TOT difference to impute the Control Complier Mean outcome
(CCM):

(6) CCM = E[YIC = 1, Z = 0] = E[1C = 1, Z = 1]
- {E[]C = 1,Z= 1]-E[Y]C= 1,Z= 0]}
= E[Y)C = 1, Z = 1] - TOT.

Although E[YIC = 1, Z = 0] is not directly observable, E[YIC =
1, Z = 1], and TOT can be estimated. With a mean outcome for
treated compliers of .40 and a TOT effect of .10, for example, the

mean outcome level among the "Control Compliers" who would
have taken up a voucher if it had been offered to them would be
.30, and the change in the outcome for compliers relative to the
level of the outcome in the absence of the treatment would be 33
percent.

V. MOBILITY AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTERISTICS

As intended, the MTO program had a substantial impact on

the residential location of households offered vouchers to live in a
private market apartment. The share of MTO-Boston families in

our sample who used a program voucher to move from their
original location (which we refer to as the "take-up rate") was .48
for the Experimental group and .62 for the Section 8 Comparison

group, as reported in the first row of panel A of Table JV.22 The
lower take-up rate for Experimental group families resulted from

two ways in which the treatment they received differed from the
treatment received by Comparison group families. On the one
hand, the restriction imposed on Experimental group families
limiting them to apartments in census tracts with poverty rates

below 10 percent could have reduced their take-up of the program, both because it was more difficult to find apartments farther outside the city and because of possible perceived disamenities associated with moves to low-poverty neighborhoods such as
greater transportation costs or social isolation. On the other
hand, the extensive housing search counseling provided to Experimental group families presumably increased their take-up rate.

22. This pattern of lower take-up rates for the Experimental group than for
the Section 8 Comparison group is found at all five MTO sites. Goering et al.
[1999] report that the final take-up rates across all the MTO sites were 47 percent
for the Experimentals and 60 percent for the Section 8 Comparison group.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

626 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE IV

MOBILITY AND CENSUS TRACT CHARACTERISTICS FROM THE MTO-BOSTON
FOLLOW-UP SURVEY
Intent-to-Treat Difference

Control

Mean Exp - Control Sec8 - Control

(1)

(2)

(3)

A. Mobility

Subsidized move through MTO .000 .479** .619**
program

(.036)

(.047)

Any residential move out of .049 .234** .069**

Boston

city

limits

(.035)

(.035)

Any residential move out of .271 .325** .414**
original housing project (.049) (.057)
B. Census tract characteristics

Poverty

rate

.359

-.122**

-.100*

(.014) (.016)

Welfare receipt .294 -.097** -.066**
(.012) (.013)

Female-headed households .531 -.136** -.091**
(.016) (.018)

Managerial and professional .206 .029** .022**
workers

(.007)

(.008)

Education beyond high school .289 .064** .066**

degree

(.013)

(.015)

Speak almost no English .097 -.025** .000
(.007) (.009)

Hispanic

.218

-

.056**

-

.018

(.017) (.021)
Black

.449

-

.095**

-.057

(.035) (.040)

C. Test scores of school child
attends

Reading test score percentile .083 .076** .026
of

school

(.021)

(.022)

Math test score percentile of .099 .061** .027
school

(.022)

(.025)

Intent-to-Treat Difference is based on equation (3). Standard errors are reported in parentheses, adjusted for household level clustering; * = p-value < .1; ** = p-value < .05. Data in panels A and B are from
the 1990 Census. In panel C, percentiles are weighted to represent fraction of Massachusetts students in

schools with average test score below average score of school child attends, based on the 1994 Massachusetts
Educational Assessment Program data from the Massachusetts Department of Education. Sample size is 525
households (Exp: 236; Sec8: 113; Control: 176) for panels A and B, and 408 children ages 6-15 for panel C.

The restriction on eligible census tracts appears to have been
more important than the counseling leading to lower take-up for
the Experimental group.
Tr

1__

I

I]

:1

;L

L1

'__

J_

I_:

It

-'

L-'

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 627

determinants of take-up for both the Experimental and Section 8

Comparison groups. To distill the vast number of variables in the
Baseline Survey that are possibly relevant predictors of take-up
into a parsimonious (and interpretable) specification, we created
several indices of questions on the same or highly correlated
topics. We find that indices of Confident Attitudes and Dangerous
Living Conditions are highly significant predictors of take-up,

while Social Involvement in the Community and Public Assistance Receipt are not significant.23 A possible interpretation of
these findings is that households with greater (perceived) net

benefits from a move-because of their better ability to handle
life in a new neighborhood and a worse safety situation in their

public housing project-are more likely to take advantage of
vouchers providing an opportunity to move out of public housing.

We also examined the relationship between take-up and an index
of behavior problems among children identified in the Baseline
Survey.24 The main finding of this analysis is a large and sig23. These indices were constructed to be the proportion of households answering affirmatively to related questions. Confident Attitudes refers to the
proportion that were "very sure" about their ability to handle a move (six questions) and that would not feel bad about living in a white, higher-income neighborhood (four questions). Dangerous Living Conditions refers to the proportion
reporting personal victimization of a householder (five questions); unsafe neigh-

borhood conditions (four questions); big neighborhood problems with litter, graffiti, drinking, drug dealing, and abandoned buildings (six questions); and apart-

ment problems with paint, plumbing, rodents, locks, windows, wiring, heating,
and space (eight questions). Social Involvement in the Community refers to the
proportion reporting interactions with neighbors (eight questions), friends or

family in the neighborhood (two questions), and use of services such as buses,
churches, and clinics within fifteen minutes of home (five questions). Public

Assistance Receipt use refers to the proportion reporting receipt of AFDC, Food
Stamps, SSI, WIC, or other public assistance payments (nine questions).
An increase in the proportion of Confident Attitudes responses from .2 to .7
(tenth to ninetieth percentile) is associated with a nineteen percentage point
increase in take-up. An increase in the proportion of Dangerous Living Conditions
responses from .18 to .72 (tenth to ninetieth percentile) is associated with a
fourteen percentage point increase in take-up. These results are from a linear
probability model of take-up controlhng for the covariates in Table II (not included
themselves in the indices), using pooled data on the 360 Experimental and Section
8 Comparison group households. The effects of background characteristics on
take-up are similar across the two treatment groups, but the limited sample sizes
make it difficult to rule out large differences in the determinants of take-up for the
Experimental and Comparison treatments.
24. This index was the proportion of behavior problems reported about the
child from the six listed in panel B of Table II. An increase in the proportion of
boys' behavior problems from 0 to .5 (to ninetieth percentile) was associated with
an eleven percentage point increase in take-up (p-value .24). An increase for girls
from 0 to .33 (to ninetieth percentile) was associated with a 22 percentage point
decrease in take-up (p-value .002). These results are from a linear probability
model of take-up controlling for a main effect of gender and the covariates in Table
II (not interacted with gender), using pooled data on the 388 children in the
Experimental and Section 8 Comparison group households.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

628 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

nificant gender asymmetry; behavior problems among boys are

positively related to take-up, problems among girls are negatively
related to take-up.

The two MTO treatments also led to differing distributions of
destination neighborhoods. In the second row of panel A, we find

that at the time of the Follow-up Survey few Control (.05) and
Section 8 Comparison (.12) households were living outside the
city of Boston, while the Experimental group (.28) households

were much more likely to live outside the city limits.25 During the
1-3.5 years that elapsed by the time of the Follow-up Survey, a

substantial share (.27) of Control households had moved out of
their origin housing project or other Census block group from the

time of the Baseline Survey. Among the Experimental group, 60
percent of households had moved out of their original location (48
percent through MTO and 12 percent independently). Among the

Section 8 Comparison group, 68 percent had moved (62 percent
through MTO and 6 percent independently).26
To assess the differences in residential locations of program
participants, we present the mean characteristics of neighbor-

hoods based on 1990 Census tract data. Panel B of Table IV shows
that the local areas in which Experimental and Section 8 Comparison households were living at the time of the Follow-up
Survey were significantly different on average from the Control
households across many different dimensions, including a lower
poverty rate, lower welfare receipt, and higher education levels.27

25. Nearly all of those outside the city limits were living in Boston's surrounding communities, although there were six Experimental and two Control
households who moved out to other states. In addition, there were three Section
8 Comparison households living in Puerto Rico with whom we completed interviews but from whom we were unable to obtain street addresses that could be
matched to Census tracts; these household are therefore not included in Table IV.
26. Although some Section 8 Comparison families had moved independently
of the MTO program, they did not necessarily stop receiving some form of projectbased or tenant-based housing assistance. In the Follow-up Survey, 98 percent
reported receiving government housing assistance, a significantly higher rate of
receipt than the 93 percent in the Experimental group and the 90 percent in the

Control group. Thus, the treatment increased housing assistance receipt (relative
to the counterfactual of being in the Control group) for 8 percent of Section 8
Comparison families in addition to influencing residential location for 62 percent

in that group.
27. We have also replicated these analyses of neighborhood characteristics

with Census block group data, and the results are quite similar. The mean poverty
rates for hloek -ro11nq are as fo11ows: En .250: Spe 9.275: and Control .R3

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 629

The Section 8 Comparison group had smaller differences relative
to the control group in racial composition and fraction speaking
almost no English.
Panel C provides information about the peers children are
exposed to in school. It displays the average reading and math

test score percentiles for the schools that MTO children were
attending at the time of the Follow-up Survey. These percentiles
are calculated by taking the average test score for the students in
the school from a statewide test and then determining the frac-

tion of Massachusetts students who attend schools with average
test scores below the average score for students in the school that

the MTO child attends.28 The Control group children attend
schools that on average have reading test scores in the eighth
percentile and math test scores in the tenth percentile of the
school test score distribution. The Experimental group experi-

enced an eight percentile point increase in school average reading
scores, and a six percentile point increase in average math scores.
The results for both reading and math test scores indicate that

even though many families are moving through MTO to neighborhoods with substantially less poverty than their origin neigh-

borhoods, the schools MTO children are attending have test
scores that are still well below the state average. Indeed, over 85
percent of children in Experimental households that made program moves still attend schools with average test scores below

the state median. The Section 8 group experienced smaller and
statistically insignificant increases in school quality as measured

by test scores. The small changes for the Section 8 group are not
surprising since many of the households remain in the city of
Boston with many of their children staying in their original
schools.

The similarity in the mean characteristics of the neighbor-

hoods of the Experimental and Section 8 Comparison groups does
not convey the differences in the distribution of tract characteristics. Data on the distribution of tract poverty rates are pre28. The test scores come from the 1996 Massachusetts Educational Assessment Program (MEAP). The test was administered to students in grades 4, 8, and
10. For schools that contained two tested grades, we counted the grade closest to
the grade of the MTO child. Our overall response rate for school test score variable
was only 67 percent (as compared with about 93 percent for most child outcomes)

because of difficulties matching the school name that was provided to us by the

MTO parent to our list of all schools in Massachusetts. The MEAP was not
administered to students in private schools or charter schools. We did not find
noticeable differences in the fraction of students attending private or charter
schools across the three groups.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

630 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE V
DISTRIBUTION SHARES OF CENSUS TRACT POVERTY RATES FROM MTO-BOSTON
FOLLOW-UP SURVEY
No
subsidized Subsidized
No

move

move

subsidized through through

move and MTO MTO
Overall overall program program
Exp Sec8 Control Exp Sec8 Exp Sec8
Poverty
0-10

rate

.362

.134

(1)

(2)

.018

(3)

.029

(4)

(5)

.068

(6)

.724

(7)

.175

10-20 .113 .242 .110 .080 .026 .150 .374
20-30 .151 .294 .190 .196 .162 .102 .376
30-40 .068 .078 .088 .109 .082 .024 .075
40+

.306

.253

.593

.587

.663

.000

.000

Mean .237 .259 .359 .362 .370 .100 .190
Share of .449 .216 .335 .234 .082 .215 .134
sample
Sample size is 525 households.

sented for the three MTO groups in columns (1)-(3) of Table V.
Although many families in both the Experimental and Section 8
groups moved to lower poverty neighborhoods, members of the
Section 8 Comparison group were the least likely to remain in a
tract with a poverty rate of greater than 40 percent.

Columns (3)-(5) show the distribution of Census tract poverty rates for households who did not make a subsidized move
through the MTO program. The mean poverty rates for the three
groups are within one percentage point of each other, and the

distributions are quite similar. Under the assumption that the
program had no impact on families that did not lease up through
the program, this implies that the mean poverty rates are essen-

tially the same within the Control group for those who would
have taken a program rental voucher if offered (Control Compliers) and those who would not have taken it (Control Never Takers).29 In other words, those in the Control group who would have
29. As discussed in Section IV, the Overall Control mean is a weighted
average of the Control Complier mean and the Control Never Taker mean:

E[YIZ - 01 = E[YIC = 1, Z = 01 Pr[C = 1, Z = 01 + E[YIC = 0, Z = 01(1 -

Pr[C = 1, Z = 01). Under the identifying assumptions in Section III, the

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 631

utilized the rental voucher if offered were no more likely move to

a lower poverty neighborhood on their own in the absence of a

voucher than those who would not have utilized the voucher.
The Census tract poverty rate distribution for households

who did make a subsidized move through the MTO program, the
Treatment Compliers, is shown in columns (6)-(7) of Table V.
Nearly all of the Experimental movers initially moved to a Cen-

sus tract with a poverty rate of less than 10 percent as prescribed
by program rules, but by the time of the Follow-up Survey (1-3.5

years after random assignment) only 72 percent were living in
tracts with less than a 10 percent poverty rate because some had

made subsequent moves to higher poverty tracts.30 Among Section 8 Comparison group members who moved through the MTO
program, only 18 percent were living in a tract with a poverty rate
less than 10 percent. But for both groups of movers, there were no
families living in a tract with a poverty rate of greater than 40
percent, in comparison to an overall share of 60 percent in col-

umns (3)-(5) among those who did not make a subsidized move.
In summary, about three-quarters of the Experimental Compliers moved and remained in neighborhoods with a poverty rate

below 10 percent, while about three-quarters of Section 8 Comparison Compliers ended up in neighborhoods with poverty rates
between 10 and 40 percent. However, because take-up was higher
in the Section 8 group, fewer Section 8 families remained in
Census tracts with poverty rates above 40 percent.

VI. CHILDREN's HuMAN CAPITAL: BEHAVIOR AND HEALTH

This section presents results of the impacts of the MTO

treatments on child behavior and mental and physical health.
These outcomes are of interest both as key short-term measures

of child well-being and as potentially important inputs into the
human capital production function. Models of neighborhood ef-

difference between the Control Complier mean and the Control Never Taker mean

is equivalent to (E[YIZ = 01 - E[YID = 0, Z = 1])/Pr[D - 1, Z = 11.

Throughout this paper we estimate the statistical significance of this difference
without covariates for simplicity.
30. Families using a program voucher were free to move again after one year
while continuing to receive the rental voucher, and Experimental group families
were no longer restricted to low poverty areas in choosing their location. Among
those in both treatment groups who initially made a move outside the Boston city
limits through the MTO program, 14 percent had returned to live within Boston
at the time of the Follow-up Survey.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

632 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

fects suggest that moves to safer and more affluent neighborhoods are likely to be associated with reductions in child problem
behaviors. Furthermore, the medical literature documents an
association in clinical settings between chronic exposure to violence and patterns of child health and behaviors, such as diffi-

culty concentrating because of fatigue due to sleep disturbances
or images of traumatic events, fearfulness of being alone, and
aggressiveness due to behavior imitation or self-protection [Augustyn et al. 1995; Groves et al. 1993].

In our qualitative fieldwork we also developed a hypothesis
that the fear and anxiety of living in a violent neighborhood may

cause emotional and behavioral problems that may adversely
affect the mental health of children. This hypothesis is encapsu-

lated in the comments of one woman who described to us why she
had used an MTO voucher to move to a suburban location.
As long as the kids is safe, that what my main concern was.... They can't
grow up normally in an atmosphere of fear. They can't play games and stuff.
So I had to do it. And that was the best chance when they said we had to move
in the suburbs. Living in the same area, that's not good. Even the elderly

people, they living in fear, captive in their own homes. My mother lives like

that. It's terrible.... In the 'hood-my kids, they had friends. But I wouldn't
let them go out, because I was afraid. Bullets don't got no name.

This same woman described to us a visit she took to her old

neighborhood with her four year old daughter: "Even now, we
can't drive up the street. My baby, she so scared that she start
cryin'. 'No-no-no.' She don't even want to go near there. It's
amazing how little kids remember that stuff."
To assess the impact of residential location on the mental
health of children, we asked household heads in the Follow-up

Survey if their children had exhibited various behavior problems
during the past three months. The questions we administered in
the Follow-up Survey were items fielded previously in the National Health Interview Survey and the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth Children's Supplement (NLSY-CS). From those
instruments we selected seven questions that focused on types of
behaviors that the mothers could observe directly, as opposed to
questions generically about behavior problems or questions requiring intuition about how their child was feeling. The behaviors
we asked about were the following: trouble getting along with
teachers, disobedience at home, disobedience at school, hanging
around with troublemakers, bullying others, inability to sit still,
and depression. To summarize the responses to the seven behav-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 633

ior problem questions, we created an index that is the fraction of
the problems that were "sometimes" or "often" true of the child, as

opposed to "not true."31
We present results on behavior problems in Table VI separately for boys and girls. Since we use the same table structure for

a variety of outcomes, we explain it here in some detail. Each row

of Table VI corresponds to a different outcome from the Follow-up
Survey. In the first row the outcome is the household head's
report of the proportion of behavior problems displayed by her
male child. We find in column (1) that the average fraction of the

seven behavior problems in the Control group was .33.32 In comparison, the Experimental group had a fraction of behavior problems nine percentage points lower than the Control group, based

on the ITT estimates reported in column (2). Assuming that only
those who made a subsidized move through the MTO program
had a nonzero average treatment effect, the TOT effect for the
Experimental group was an eighteen percentage point reduction
in behavior problems, reported in column (3). As we discussed in

Section IV, it is also possible to estimate the average level of the
outcome for those in the Control group who would have used an
MTO voucher if it had been offered to them. This Control Complier mean is reported in column (4). Thus, the Experimental

group compliers experienced a change in behavior problems of
-.18 from a mean .44, a relative decrease of 42 percent. Columns

(5)-(8) show a similarly large decrease in behavior problems for
boys in the Section 8 Comparison group.
Both the ITT and TOT estimates are regression adjusted,

controlling for the Baseline Survey household variables summa31. Using the data on the children from ages eight to fourteen in the NLSYCS, we find that this index of seven behavior problems and some of its components
(especially the measure of trouble getting along with teachers) are statistically
significant predictors of socioeconomic outcomes (alcohol use, drug use, criminal

involvement, and school enrollment) measured four to eight years later. Thus,

child behavior problems may provide a good indicator for human capital development. MTO treatment effect estimates for individual components of the behavior
problems index are available in Katz, Kling, and Liebman [2000].
32. For context, we examined behavior problems in a sample of children ages
6-14 from the 1998 NLSY-CS, whose mothers have roughly the same median age
as the MTO sample. Weights to adjust the national sample to reflect MTO
demographics were based on indicators for age, sex, and gender of the child, and
indicators for head of household having twelve years of education, or more than
twelve years. These variables were used to predict the odds of participating in

MTO versus being a national survey sample respondent, based on the exponen-

tiated latent index of a logit model of participation estimated from stacked MTO
and national survey data. The demographically adjusted mean of the behavior
problems index was .35 for boys and .25 for girls, slightly higher than the .33 for
boys and .20 for girls ages 6-14 among MTO Controls.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

634 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

*SH
U
L e O O CO cO CO
oQO
0vO=
Cq
-0
00
CO

m~~ 0 Os* O~ CO 1> O~ O CO ;

v -4- M :f

>

CO-.

CO
0 - * 00 2

cn

p

..

-

,.

IC
0 20

LO2-

I

010

Uo

OWm

g

1

cp--i

)9W

;_, E-1 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ClCOCO

CO~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C

?

C

QH

CO
01

o

0

0

;Uc

to

CO3

*

rc

C

-

o0.

oo

u

It

4O

m od c
0

CC

mO

*
*
**;oA
CO
1- CO
011
0 CO~~~~~~~~~0 10 U P

CO 0 C~O CO C~O In In0

0

C.

,

o

D

D

B

'

A

ooooo*

Q

'

i

**

Q

g

?

'

g

'

"0

oo

o

tv0

Ho-, 000 01- 00 q 1 00 - oW .

Co

.

YU

CO 0 ?Oo 0% Q ;
F-1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~12CO
to v o S . . . . . . . t t g r m C)

D~~~~~~j m-I C- 02 6
0 i'-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i'---' 4 m L -im - .
Z CO ~~~~~~~~~~N CO C - 'tCO CO CO 1 co ; c
o
-45
E-1
2
01
01
0
02
C

0 CO CO CO CO~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 ~ O1
cq

Cl

'

t

Cq0

o 0 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~L 0 4 0 0 C

m

01

.~CO

o

0

~~~~~~~~~~~m04

pq cn cn~~~~CC1 O~S O

COCD

C)~~~~~~~~~0C

Cl ClS CICO~~~~~~c
CO ~CO -3
~ ~ ~oK2
Cl~ ~ ~~~~~~~~c CO ' C4 cdbW3

o

.

2bC

oEi

~COCCWCl HOOWEl

0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ FI
0 CO~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~)C

C.) CO~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~' 01110+Q)15

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 635

rized in panel A of Table II (age, race, sex, marital status, family
structure, disability, welfare receipt, education, employment, car
ownership, mobility history, social contact, victimization, and
neighborhood poverty rate) and the Baseline Survey child behav-

ior variables in panel B of Table II. These regressions adjust for
differences in Baseline Survey characteristics that may have
occurred by chance, and absorb residual variation to improve the
efficiency of estimation.33
Among girls in row 2, the ITT estimates show only modest
reductions in behavior problems for both treatment groups, and
the estimates are not statistically distinguishable from zero. No-

tably, this concentration of the effects in reduction of behavior
problems among boys and not girls was also found in the recent

evaluation of the New Hope employment assistance demonstration in Milwaukee [Bos et al. 1999]. Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn
[2000] report evidence that suggests a behavior problem reduction among children ages 8-18 at the New York MTO site, although results are not reported by gender. The generally high
level of behavior problems among Control Complier boys suggests

that households who had boys with behavior problems were more
likely to accept an MTO program voucher if one was offered to
them, a hypothesis that is consistent with our earlier result that
households with a boy with behavior problems were more likely to
take up an offered voucher.
One mechanism through which the gender differences may

be occurring is social contact with other children. Girls in Control
Complier households were particularly likely to have had at least
one friend in the neighborhood, but girls in Complier households
from both treatment groups each had a significant relative de-

cline of about 30 percent in their chance of having a friend in the
neighborhood.34 We speculate that these socialization difficulties

for girls may offset some of the benefits for mental health of living
in a different neighborhood.
Regarding physical health, a substantial medical literature
33. Because of the random assignment, the Baseline Survey Characteristics
are essentially orthogonal to the treatment indicators, so the magnitudes of the
point estimates do not change substantively when we include covariates. For
example, the simple difference in means of the Experimental and Control groups
in behavior problems for boys is -.098, versus the regression-adjusted ITT estimate of -.090.

34. For analysis of binary outcomes throughout this paper, we use linear
probability models for simplicity in computing 2SLS estimates, and correct the
standard errors for heteroskedasticity. In general, our results do not appear to be
sensitive to whether we use linear probability models or probit estimates.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

636 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

shows that living in the inner-city is associated with detrimental
child health outcomes with urban children having higher rates of
accidents, injuries [Quinlan 1996], and asthma [Weiss et al.
1992]. Our fieldwork reinforced the idea that there were other
important types of danger associated with living in a public
housing project. For example, one woman described how the park
at which they played in the projects was built on cement. "The
place was not safe for the children to play. They had swings on
concrete. Everything was on concrete. And that's where most of
the accidents happened."

In the Follow-up Survey, we asked specifically about any
injuries, accidents, or poisonings that a child may have been
involved in during the past six months. Most injuries were related
to a dangerous environmental factor (such as a used needle), were
falls during "horsing around" and other play among children, or
were sports-related (cycling, skating, ball-playing). In row 5 of
Table VI we report results for injuries and accidents. There was
a relative decrease among Experimental Compliers of 74 percent
from a Control Complier mean of .160. The effect for the Section
8 Comparison group was about half as large and not statistically significant. For a comparison, we estimated the six-month
prevalence of injuries, accidents, and poisonings in a national
sample that we weighted to be demographically similar to MTO
children. Our estimate of .029 is lower than all of the MTO groups
including the Experimental Compliers.35
Asthma attacks are thought to be triggered in part by environmental factors, including crowding [Weitzman et al. 1992],
poor air quality [Thurston 19971, stress [Wright 1998], lack of
heat, and exposure to allergens from cockroaches, dust mites,
mice, and rats [Gelber et al. 1993; Sharfstein et al. 19981. Stress
could come from exposure to violence, and many of the environmental irritants could result from poor housing. In the Baseline
Survey, for instance, we found that 32 percent of MTO families
reported that rats and mice were "a big problem," and 9 percent
reported that the heating system was a big problem. Our field35. The estimate of .029 is based on the 1988 National Health Interview
Survey Child Supplement (NHIS-CS) data, weighted to reflect MTO demographics. Because the NHIS-CS uses a twelve-month recall period instead of our
six-month recall period, we then deflate the NHIS-CH estimates for comparison to
the MTO-Boston results. Our deflator of .68 (instead of a simple .50) is derived
from research on NHIS-CH recall effects [Harel et al. 19941 and accounts for the
fact the respondents appear to be less likely to report injuries if they occurred
many months ago in the recall period.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 637

work suggested that a move out of a housing project apartment
might remove a child from many of these environmental irritants.
In row 6 of Table VI we report a relative decline of 65 percent in
the probability of an asthma attack requiring medical attention
among Experimental Compliers (TOT p-value .083), from a Control Complier mean of .16.36 There was essentially no effect for
the Section 8 Comparison group.

An obvious concern regarding the injury and asthma results
is the qualification that the events were defined to "require medical attention." We had included this qualification for compara-

bility to national data, and to establish a threshold of severity.

However, medical care may have been less accessible in the
locations to which the Experimental Compliers moved. We at-

tempted to measure this accessibility by asking whether the child

had been to the doctor for a regular checkup. In row 7 of Table VI
we find that the Section 8 Comparison group actually had a larger
point estimate reduction in regular doctors' visits than the Ex-

perimental group, although both effects are statistically insignificant. Based on this evidence, if access to medical care was the
sole mechanism driving changes in reported injuries and asthma
attacks, we would have expected any access-driven effects to have
been at least as large in the Section 8 Comparison group as in the
Experimental group.

VII. ADULT ECONOMIC SELF-SUFFICIENCY

A primary motivation for the MTO demonstration is to measure the impacts of residential neighborhoods on the welfare
receipt and employment of low-income families. Many central
cities have higher rates of joblessness and slower rates of job
growth than their surrounding areas. This pattern suggests that
providing low-income city residents with better access to jobs in
the suburbs may improve their labor market outcomes. The Ex-

perimental treatment might be expected to reduce welfare use
and increase employment by moving participants closer to suburban job centers. But moves to new suburban neighborhoods
might disrupt preexisting social networks that are an important
36. The 1997 NHIS shows that only .06 of a sample demographically similar
to MTO children were reported to have had an asthma attack in the past year,
while .13 were reported to have ever had asthma. The proportion of MTO children
ages 6-15 in the Control group reported to have had an asthma attack in the past
six months was .10, and the proportion reported to currently have asthma was .25.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

638 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

source of labor market information and connections. It may take
a significant amount of time in new neighborhoods to develop new
networks. Thus, the theoretical predictions about the short-run

effects of MTO on welfare and employment are ambiguous.
To the extent that families in the Experimental and Section

8 Comparison groups are able to move to safer neighborhoods

with more plentiful after-school activities for children, parents
may have child supervision constraints relaxed and be freer to

enter the labor market and to work longer hours. Indeed, Rosenbaum and Popkin's [19911 analysis of a survey of female household heads in the Gautreaux program in Chicago found substantially higher employment rates (fourteen percentage points) for
those who moved to the suburbs than for those who moved to
other parts of the central city.37
The most striking facts in the MTO data are the changes over
time for all three groups. Welfare receipt has fallen sharply, from
73 percent in the third quarter of 1994 (prior to any random
assignment) to 40 percent in the third quarter of 1998. The
employment rate, as measured by the fraction with positive earnings in a quarter, has also increased dramatically over time for all
three MTO groups. Over four years, the employment rate rose
from 29 percent in the third quarter of 1994 to 49 percent in the
third quarter of 1998.
In Table VII we show the results comparing MTO groups
based on these data for our main sample of 540 household heads.
In the first row we pool data for the first three quarters after
random assignment, and find no significant differences between
MTO groups in rates of welfare receipt. The results are essentially the same for later periods, 4-6 quarters and 7-9 quarters
after random assignment.38 The results for employment similarly
show no significant between-group differences. In results not
shown in the table, we found no differences between MTO groups
in quarterly earnings in constant 1999 dollars (including zeros for
those with no reported earnings) for these periods. Although
37. The differential in survey response rates between the suburban movers
(60 percent) and city movers (88 percent) is a source of concern in assessing this
evidence, especially if the more successful suburban movers were more likely to
have remained in their suburban location and been reached by and responded to
the survey mailed to them.
38. Measured in calendar time rather than time since random assignment,
there is some modest evidence of a decline in welfare usage among treatment
group members in 1998. Pooling all four 1998 quarters, the overall control mean
is .425. The Experimental group ITT estimate is -.025 (.031) and the Section 8
group ITT estimate is -.064 (.034).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 639

o U~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~oI O

-~~~~ ~ ~ ~~ o~~~ co c0 r-4l GO tz-

o

UG

L

Q

t

"It

cUo

I

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

U

)

0

U)

d

U,

G

71

O

cq

o
Cd>

LO

(a (a)O Lo r-- L- LO t- 0el m t- L-

O g Y O Q ?~~~~~~~O O O O O O O0 O O O) O C tS
o

oo
O

U)

,

GO

H

U

o

U OU
UU

*

0

z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- m L Yo o 't L?o 4 N 4 Q E--4H=

g r = H A o,~~~~~~~~~ o o. o. o, o o,o. o. o, o.
H ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~-4-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -

4

V

,

E-1r

~~~
GO U) Qp

Cl ~~~~~~~-4 0 GO~ ~~~~() 4
E4U?

Q O~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~
pq

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

0U2

0 LO0OzGOGO~GO
o
Q
a)
a)
z~~~
~ I>
G0 Q
OOQ
O GO

::

O X Q S > GO OD O OO OO G O G O OUQ-w .

o

H

a)

:{=?

t

U

zd E -G OC 4 G O 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0

0QH~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

4f

fO

-4

>

C.0

0

0

00

co~~

~0

U)~~~~~~~~~~U

~~~~~~~C

U

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

640 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

these administrative data cover only earnings in the state of
Massachusetts, we did confirm that over 95 percent of our sample

was still living in Massachusetts in 1997 in the Follow-up Survey.
Thus, even the most extreme assumptions about location and
welfare or employment status of the remaining 5 percent would
not generate significant differences in these between-group
results.39

The overall lack of impact is consistent with the finding
reported in Section III that only 2 percent of households in the
Baseline Survey reported employment as one of the main reasons

for wanting to participate in MTO. Similar results have been
found for other MTO sites. Research from the Baltimore site
using administrative data finds no significant effects in employ-

ment during the first four years after randomization [Ludwig,

Duncan, and Pinkston 2000], although their analysis does suggest a decline in welfare receipt for the Experimental group. A
household survey of early enrollees in the Los Angeles site finds
no significant employment effects, but it does show modest evidence of increases in hours of work and weekly earnings for
Experimental and Section 8 Comparison group household heads
relative to those in the control group [Hanratty, McLanahan, and
Pettit 1998].

VIII. FAMILY QuALITY OF LIFE
At the time of the baseline survey, 56 percent of the 540
household heads in our Boston sample reported that the main
reason they wanted to move was "to get away from drugs and

gangs." Our qualitative interviews confirmed that fear for

the safety of their children was the most powerful motive for
most families in deciding to apply for MTO, and that this fear
was greatly reduced among families that moved to new
neighborhoods.
We initially hypothesized that improvements in safety may

39. We have also extended this analysis to the complete sample of all 961
household heads randomly assigned through MTO in Boston. The results for
welfare, employment, and earnings are unchanged by this extension of the sample. In addition, our MTO-Boston Follow-up Survey asked about welfare receipt
and a standard set of questions from the Current Population Survey on current
labor market status (employment, unemployment, not in labor force), usual hours
of work, and usual weekly earnings, as well as some supplemental questions on
fringe benefits. Again, we find no evidence of significant differences between
groups on any of these dimensions.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 641

be associated with improvements in adult mental health and

perhaps overall health, because of reduced stress. To take one
example, a middle-aged Black woman who had lived in public
housing for 25 years gave the following description of her
experience:
When you go outside, you don't know what's flying around the corner. You
gotta look both ways when you open the front door. You had to constantly
look behind you to make sure nothing's comin' around you.... It was like

living in prison. I was afraid to get in my own car and go some place, and
come back home and not know if your house would be shot out or what ...

After enrolling in MTO in 1994, she moved to a demographically
older and more racially mixed part of Boston. "It's so beautiful. So
nice. The neighbors are very friendly.... I like the peace and
quiet. I have peace of mind." In other qualitative interviews we

also observed that adults who were living in public housing appeared to be in much more emotional distress than those who had
moved out of public housing. One mediating factor influencing
mental health that we speculated would potentially offset increased safety among MTO program movers was difficulty in
maintaining or establishing social contact with friends and relatives in new locations.

To assess these hypotheses more systematically, we asked a

number of related questions in the MTO-Boston Follow-up Survey. This section presents the results on aspects of family safety,
adult health, and adult social interactions that may have substantial impacts on family quality of life.
A. Family Safety
We find strong evidence that the MTO program has led to
significant improvements in the perceived safety of treatment
group families, declines in exposure to violence, and reduced
rates of criminal victimization. While we had a sharp hypothesis
that the treatment groups would be in neighborhoods with fewer
drugs and guns, we had competing hypotheses regarding victimization since families moving into new neighborhoods may be
particular targets of crime, especially among children who at
least initially may get into more fights or be more likely to have
items stolen. The results demonstrate that the program has led to

both lower exposure to violence and reduced victimization, improving well-being along the dimension that was most important
to program participants. Moreover, improved safety may be an

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

642 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

important contributor to reductions in child behavior problems

and improvements in adult mental health.
We summarize the effects of the MTO treatments on selfreported measures of safety in Table VIII. The estimates in rows
1 and 2 show a large and statistically significant improvement in
perceived neighborhood safety and children's exposure to weapons for the Experimental group relative to the Control group. The

analogous results are reported in columns (5)-(7) for the Section
8 Comparison group, whose members also reported a lower
prevalence of feeling unsafe and exposure to weapons-but this

difference is not statistically distinguishable from zero. The next
two rows of Table VIII presents results on whether family mem-

bers have been exposed to drugs or gunfire. Families in both
treatment groups experienced substantial declines in exposure to
these neighborhood problems, with those in the MTO Experimental Group experiencing the largest declines. Overall, the Control
Complier means for exposure to weapons gunfire, and drugs are
generally higher than the overall Control means for both treatment groups, which is consistent with a decision process in which
the families who take up an MTO voucher were those who would
have been living in a more unsafe neighborhood in the absence of
an MTO voucher offer.

We asked MTO household heads in our Boston Follow-up

Survey about victimization of themselves and their children during the past six months. Our measures of victimization were

modeled on the redesigned National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS).40 Overall, one-quarter of Control group households in
the Follow-up Survey in the Control group reported at least one

40. For details on the NCVS redesign, see the Bureau of Justice Statistics

[19941 overview. Our Follow-up Survey included selected NCVS cues about people, places, and things intended to assist respondents in recalling events, such as
theft (of a purse, wallet, or jewelry), assault (involving a neighbor, friend, relative,
or someone at work or school), or attacks with a weapon (such as a frying pan,
scissors, rock, bottle, knife, or gun). In another attempt to improve upon the
Baseline Survey victimization measures, we asked specifically about the dates of
incidents in order to exclude those occurring more than six months prior to the
interview.
Following the NCVS, we classified reported incidents into property and per-

sonal crimes. Our property crimes include household burglary and attempted
entry, vandalism, and theft not directly from a person. Our personal crimes
include physical attacks, threats of attack, and theft directly from a person. We
further classified personal crimes as principally involving the household head, at
least one child, or involving both-where involvement was defined as being
present at the incident and being the person threatened, robbed, or attacked.
Since our information on children's victimization is obtained from the household
head, we probably underestimate actual victimization of children.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 643

m CeD C-1~~~~o6

C

A
+>
-is

co

A

U

'-

Y

U

00

Cl

C

*-o

Q

**

0

oCoNooo

Q0
In
In C.0 t- -q

o

0

:

0
I

4-D ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 1

~~~~*
0 X;
O H COa lNGQUb0U~Ct*OQ CI42I
C o X*I***
o 0CDVs=
o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Cd
o
N

0

o

5

-

V~C
C* 0S
CC ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0*

Nt
Co
t~~~~~~~
U2 C.
WLCd~~~~~0
ao .mtoC.M.r4C ~~~~~
0
C0
LO

11~~~~~~~~~~~L

CZ0

In
0m
:

m
mC.0
Xsosr
t N m
m "t .0 q w
m
CeD
CeDMw0

m
o0

z 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
O
0

--u

k
~
* cl
X410
*
*

Cl
*

H

'l

O,

OD

OC

C

O~

O

CCC
0
00
O

O

O

O

C
osU

O

O

CCC

U

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

4

CO

C

O

CC

10

CC

.0 0

Cl

C12
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 0 C
Z ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~n(
o ~~~~~~~~~ * * * * *~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C

0

o

~~~~~

0

0*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1

0,-

~

~

~

~

~

~~~~~~~

C

0

-

o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'

0 *IZ

1~4

C00'-~

CC

~

~

10

Cl

C-

CC

'*

CC ~~~ Cl CC ~~~~c C .()C 2
P,

b.0~~~~~~.

~~~ 0 ~~~~~~~71 0O

COo

0

0
0

0

0~~~~~~

0

C2.::

Cd~~~~~~

~

-j

0

.

-4

-

0

o~~C~~410 00"O
4'0 CC(3.C 5
Co'0~~~'00'40 C
d W) cd 00W00.0

CC

0

Zl

U

0

PL,

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

644 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

crime during the previous six months, and 12 percent had a head
or child who was physically assaulted or robbed.
The results in rows 5-7 of Table VIII report the proportion of
households with one or more incidents of crimes of various

types.4' Thirteen percent of Control households were victims of
personal crimes during the past six months in which at least one

child was involved. Over two-thirds of these personal crimes
among children involved direct contact with the offender, such as
mugging, fighting, punching, kicking, spitting, shoving, throwing
of rocks, or "getting jumped" by a gang. The remainder involved

attempted assault or verbal threats of violence. Experimental
households had a prevalence six percentage points lower than the

Control group (p-value .06). The difference for the Section 8
Comparison group is negative, but insignificant.
Household heads in the Section 8 Comparison groups have a
lower prevalence of any personal crimes in the past six months,

but the proportion is insignificantly different from the level in the
Control group. The difference for the Experimental group is es-

sentially zero. For property crimes, both treatment groups show
lower prevalence of any incidents within the past six months.
B. Adult Health

As a comprehensive measure of overall health, we report
results in row 1 of Table IX from a standard question on general

health ("In general would you say that your health is excellent,
very good, good, fair, or poor?"). A consistent finding in the health
literature is that self-ratings of health are strong predictors of

subsequent health outcomes, such as mortality, in longitudinal
studies [Idler and Benyamini 1997]. In the Control Group 58
percent of heads reported health that was good or better.42 The
Experimental TOT effect is .24; the relative change from the
Control Complier mean of .46 is a 52 percent increase in the share

with health that was good or better. Similarly, the Section 8
Comparison TOT effect is .26; the relative change from the Control Complier mean of .52 is a 51 percent increase. The Control
Complier Mean is significantly lower than the Control Never
41. In results not reported in the table, we analyzed the average number of
incidents, as opposed to the proportion of households with any incident. The
results for the average number of incidents are qualitatively similar to the results
for the proportion with one or more incidents.
42. A sample from the 1997 NHIS, weighted to reflect the demographic

composition of the MTO participants (using race, sex, age, and education), was

substantially more likely to report good or better health (.87).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 645

t

o

~

0

O

>

O~

0

CO

2

cc

CO

1

>

Od

O t-:C- CO 0 e m 0 CO
Uq O4 @ k CO X Ci 0 00 .1 O COC5) 00 LO

0

o

L
A

CY

m

m

*

0~~~~~~~~~~~0

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

om3

oo

l

*

*0A>o>Ho

0

o

t-

,H

0

.Ho

'0

Q

*

*

00

o | m m N Q *% n X H H C > m n o

0 cca~~~cocca~~o~~o~occ ococcC C0.0

Q~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- (S r-i 5- c) o o . ,o.oo o,oC
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

O

o

L

;4c cCC)
0m CD D
t
0
*

o

^

*

M o o.o so mo z z e s ce ;V
0

Q

Q

mm

*

z

*-.*

_

~'C.

C

*

V~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~( m -t 10 m m C
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

0 0 0 CO~~~~~~~~ CL COccC

C) d _ -' .-4O C000000C0) 000 CS ? *5)M 07 ? M ? M
LO 00 0
L O>
'C (M
E4
C>'S
0 co
. d

0~~~~~~~~~~~0

0 4 C r4 IO C> O C O OM C) O O O O C >

'S
..
.'--4

a1

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*0
4.

o

S

E
LI
O
00

(L)000

0

.~

,

0'i

0 '.-'I'.~~~~~~~~~0-.l-D

c0

z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
cc CO .-~~~~~~~ CO 0.1 0.1 cc~~~~.3 0

0 4 (j,)~~~000
0

NO

4

0

o 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4- 0
04

4.)l

>...

>.

b

4

1

.0

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~00
0a
4
C0
W)

C.

*

0 0 - ll'0 C..0 4.

0

--Z

0J

0

0

bj)l.

0

0

0

c

4O

;.

;-

0

-

qP

41

a)

.0~~~~~~~~~~~

~~ 0004 0 E~~~~~~41 0
C-

4

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~~ 'SOo ~ ~ 0 :~~otv~ ~

000~~~~~~

0 0 ~~~~~ ~~~ ~~' ~~~' u 40

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

646 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Taker mean in the Experimental group, suggesting that those

with poorer health were more likely to accept the voucher if
offered.

To explore aspects of mental health, we asked two questions

about calmness and happiness used to assess positive affect in the
evaluation of the RAND Health Insurance Experiment [Ware et

al. 1994].43 In the second row of Table IX, we find large treatment
effects in reports of household heads feeling "calm and peaceful"
during the past four weeks.44 The relative increase for Experimental Compliers was 58 percent from a Control Complier mean
of .39, and the relative increase for Section 8 Comparison Compliers was 53 percent from a Control Complier mean of .43. The
large increase is particularly notable for Experimental group
members, since they are more likely to be in a neighborhood with
few members of the same socioeconomic or raciallethnic group as
themselves, and this could increase social isolation and introduce
countervailing distress. The relative changes for feeling "happy"
were also positive, but smaller in magnitude and not statistically
significant.

To work with a clear definition of a mental health problem,
we focused on symptoms of a particular psychiatric condition,
major depressive episode (MDE), using a series of questions from
the Composite Diagnostic Interview Short Form (CIDI-SF)
[Kessler et al. 1998]. Based on their work with the more comprehensive National Comorbidity Survey, Nelson, Kessler, and
Mroczek [1998] develop a rule for predicted MDE cases by assigning a probability to respondents with a particular number of
symptoms. The MTO sample appears to have a much higher
prevalence of MDE symptoms than a national population of similar age, race, education, and sex, but may be fairly typical of very
low-income single mothers.45 For the outcome of predicted MDE
43. An alternative interpretation of these self-ratings is that they represent
a subjective response to winning a housing voucher in a lottery, and not mental
health status caused by residential location. We interpret literature in psychology
as evidence against this interpretation, since people adapt to many life events in
short periods of up to three months [Suh, Diener, and Fujita 19961 and we are
measuring responses an average of two years after the voucher award.
44. We examined a demographically adjusted sample from the 1987 National
Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES), and found them more likely to be calm and
peaceful a good bit of the time or more (.57) than the MTO Controls (.47).
Experimental Compliers (.62) and Section 8 Comparison Compliers (.66) are more
similar to the general population ages 18-64 (.66).
45. In tabulations from the CIDI-SF administered in the 1997 National
Household Survey of Drug Abuse weighted to reflect the demographics of the MTO
sample, the predicted MDE probability was .12 as opposed to .25 in the MTO

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 647

in Table IX, row 4, we find that the point estimates suggest a
decline in depression among the treatment groups, but the differences are not quite statistically significant at conventional
levels. We note that the estimated magnitude of the relative
declines of 29 percent for Experimental Compliers and 43 percent
for Section 8 Comparison Compliers are quite large, which implies that our sample size is simply not big enough to reliably

detect changes of large magnitude for this outcome.
C. Adult Social Interactions

To assess differences in social interactions caused by participation in the MTO program, we asked several questions in the
Boston Follow-up Survey, and results are reported in rows 5-7 of

Table IX.46 First, respondents were asked about the number of
times they had visited in person with friends and family in the
past month. The point estimates of the ITT effects suggest that
Section 8 Comparison and Experimental families are less likely to
have visits to their home and more likely to make visits to the
homes of others, but all of these differences are statistically
insignificant. To assess social isolation, we examined whether a
respondent reported any visits in the past month, either to their
own home or to the homes of friends or family. Ninety percent of

the households in all three groups had at least one visit, and there
were essentially no differences between the groups.
As an alternative measure of social relations that might
influence mental health, we also examined an indicator of social
trust based on agreement with the statement "Most people can be

trusted" as opposed to "You can't be too careful in dealing with
people." Answers to this question appear to be highly correlated

with various aspects of social engagement, such as membership
in civic organizations, voting, and spending time with neighbors
[Putnam 1995].47 Only 8 percent of Control group household

Control group. In the general population of adults ages 18-64 with children,

predicted MDE was .07. In the 1997 Women's Employment Survey in Michigan
[Danziger et al. 1999], however, a population of single mothers receiving cash
assistance was found to have a predicted MDE of .27, within sampling error of the
.25 mean for the MTO Control group.
46. Based on data from the NMES, our conclusion is that the contact with
friends and relatives among the MTO participants is fairly similar to the general
population and to a demographically similar national sample.
47. Recent experimental work by Glaeser et al. [2000] suggests that this
question predicts the trustworthiness of a person's own behavior, but not their
trust in the expected behavior of others.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

648 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

heads report that most people can be trusted. We find that the
Experimental group exhibits more social trust than the Control

group, with a TOT difference of .11 from a Control Complier Mean
of .04, but the statistical significance of this TOT estimate is
marginal (p-value .11).48

IX. CONCLUSION

This paper provides early estimates of the impacts of the

MTO housing mobility demonstration on families originally residing in high-poverty housing projects in inner-city Boston. The

Experimental treatment is more successful than regular Section
8 in relocating poor families into low-poverty and suburban
neighborhoods. Regular Section 8 assistance is more effective in

getting a larger share of families out of the most distressed
communities.

Table X highlights our main findings concerning the shortrun impacts of MTO on measures of child health and behavior
problems, adult economic self-sufficiency, family safety, and adult
health (with outcomes defined such that negative changes corre-

spond to improvements). We find that children in both the Experimental and Section 8 Comparison groups exhibit fewer behavior problems, and that Experimental group children have
lower prevalence of injuries, asthma attacks, and personal

crimes. In contrast, the changes in neighborhoods induced by
MTO have not affected the employment rates, earnings, or wel-

fare usage by a statistically detectable amount for household
heads. However, there do appear to be significant improvements

in the general health status and mental health of household

heads. Table X further illustrates that the magnitudes of the
estimated relative changes in child and adult health outcomes
among treatment compliers are very substantial.

We believe that one of the principal reasons that our results
provide credible evidence of improvements in outcomes, particularly

in the domain of health, is the consistent direction of the results for

a variety of outcomes. Throughout this paper we have considered

48. In contrast to other indicators of social relations, the MTO sample differs
substantially from the general population of adults with children, of whom 31
percent report that most people can be trusted in the General Social Survey (GSS)
from 1990-1996. This difference is largely due to demographic factors. Weighting
the GSS by the sex, race, education, and age of the MTO sample, only 8 percent
report that most people can be trusted.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 649
TABLE X

SUMMARY OF IMPACTS OF MTO-BOSTON ON OUTCOMES
Experimental Section 8 Comparison
versus Control versus Control
Relative Relative

Control Change for Control Change for
Complier Treatment Complier Treatment

Mean Compliers Mean Compliers

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

A. Children's human capital
accumulation

Behavior problems index (boys) .44 -42%** .45 -36%**
Behavior problems index (girls) .20 -24% .23 -34%
Injury requiring medical attention .16 -74%** .14 -43%
Asthma attack requiring attention .16 -65%* .11 -9%
B. Adult economic self-sufficiency
Receiving TANF 7-9 quarters

after

enrollment

.52

+2%

.48

-11%

.53

-9%

Not employed 7-9 quarters after

enrollment

.62

-4%

C. Safety

Heard gunfire in neighborhood .26 - 100%** .24 -72%**
Seen drugs in neighborhood .43 -95%** .40 -54%**
Child attacked, robbed,

threatened

.16

-80%*

.15

-37%

D. Adult health

Overall health fair or poor .54 -44%** .48 -55%**
Calm and peaceful some of the

time

or

less

.61

-37%**

.57

-40%**

Happy some of the time or less .51 -27% .43 - 19%
Predicted probability of major

depressive

episode

.34

-29%

.23

-43%

Control Complier Means and Relative Changes for Compliers (based on TOT Differences) are derived
from coefficients in Tables VI-IX.
* = p-value < .1; ** = p-value < .05 (based on TOT estimates).

each outcome separately, but in assessing the joint significance of
the results it is of course important to note that all the outcomes are

measured in the same sample, and also that both treatment groups
use the same control group. Estimates of the joint probability of such
a consistent pattern of results indicate that such a pattern is ex-

tremely unlikely to be due to chance.49
49. Specifically, we estimated the odds that all eight health-related outcomes
in panels A and D for both treatment groups shown in Table X would indicate
health improvements simply due to sampling variability. To compute these odds,
we simulated the null hypothesis of no true difference between the Experimental,
Section 8 Comparison, and Control groups, accounting for the covariance struc-

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

650 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Although the eventual long-term effects of MTO on the chil-

dren of participating families remains a crucial open research
issue, the short-term impacts on adult and child circumstances

are of substantial independent importance and may be harbingers of the long-run effects of changes in neighborhood environ-

ments.50 From the perspective of housing policy, our results
clearly indicate that offering housing vouchers to the residents of
distressed inner-city housing projects improves the well-being of

those residents interested in moving out of public housing.51 If
the (long-run) benefits from moving to new neighborhoods are

particularly large for children and if parents do not fully internalize these impacts, housing vouchers for low-income families
may generate positive intergenerational externalities relative to
other income transfer mechanisms [Lazear 1983].52 However, we
do not know what the impact of MTO was on other families left
behind in the housing projects when MTO families left or on the
neighbors of MTO families in the new neighborhoods.
In summary, the lack of significant short-run impacts of the
MTO Experimental treatment on adult employment and welfare
participation suggests that reductions in spatial mismatch alone
may not be sufficient to overcome the labor market disadvantages
of inner-city, single mothers. The reductions in child problem

ture within households among outcomes, drawing 100,000 random samples with
replacement of 520 households from the Control group in the MTO-Boston Follow-up Survey. These households were then randomly designated as treatment or
control groups of the same sample sizes as the Experimental and Section 8
Comparison groups. For each sample, we then computed the between group
differences and recorded the signs of the differences. Note that these are all of the
health outcomes on which we collected data, so there is no issue of presenting only
the significant outcomes. These results show that under the null hypothesis of no
difference, the odds were 617 to 1 of randomly obtaining 16 improvements in
health-related outcomes for children and adults in the Experimental and Section
8 Comparison groups (p-value .00162).
50. We attempted to include interactions with time since enrollment in MTO
in order to study differences in treatment effects by length of exposure to new
neighborhoods. Unfortunately, this analysis did not have sufficient statistical
power to detect even large differences.
51. Our findings do not necessarily translate into positive effects for other
public housing residents of a switch from project-based housing assistance to
vouchers. Those volunteering for the MTO lottery (and especially the MTO movers) are likely to be public housing residents with particularly high expected
returns from relocating. In fact, a recent study by Jacob [2000] finds no mean
gains in educational outcomes (at least in the short run) for children leaving
high-rise public housing in Chicago because of demolitions relative to those
remaining in public housing.
52. In this case, housing vouchers may serve as a commitment device to
ensure that the transfer is disproportionately used to generate improvements in
child well-being valued by society-at-large.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 651

behaviors (especially for boys) and improvements in child health

associated with access to more-affluent neighborhoods through
MTO are consistent with models of neighborhood effects emphasizing positive peer social interactions and the impacts of adult
role models and community resources on human capital accumulation. The large improvements in family safety and adult mental

health brought about by moves out of public housing through
MTO may have been an important mechanism in bringing about
these health and behavior changes among children.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
HARVARD UNIVERSITY AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

REFERENCES

Aaronson, Daniel, "Using Sibling Data to Estimate the Impact of Neighborhoods
on Children's Educational Outcomes," Journal of Human Resources, XXXIII

(1998), 915-946.

Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin, "Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables," Journal of the American Statistical
Association, XCI (1996), 444-455.
Augustyn, Marilyn et al., "Silent Victims: Children Who Witness Violence," Contemporary Pediatrics, XII (August 1995), 35-57.
B6nabou, Roland, "Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVIII (1993), 619-652.
Black, Sandra E., "Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary
Education," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIV (1999), 577-599.
Bloom, Howard S., "Accounting for No-shows in Experimental Evaluation Designs," Evaluation Review, VIII (1984), 225-246.

Borjas, George J., "Ethnicity, Neighborhoods and Human-Capital Externalities,"

American Economic Review, LXXXV (1995), 365-390.
Bos, Johannes et al., New Hope for People with Low Incomes: Two-Year Results of
a Program to Reduce Poverty and Reform Welfare (New York: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation, August 1999).
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf, "Interactions-Based Models," in James
Heckman and Edward Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics Volume 5
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2000), forthcoming.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela K. Klebanov, and Naomi Sealand,

"Do Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?" American

Journal of Sociology, XCIX (1993), 353-395.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, Technical Background on the Redesigned National
Crime Victimization Survey: NCJ-151172 (Washington, DC: U. S. Department of Justice, 1994).
Case, Anne C., and Lawrence F. Katz, "The Company You Keep: The Effect of
Family and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youth," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 3705, May 1991.
Coleman, James S., "Social Capital and the Creation of Human Capital," American Journal of Sociology, XCIV (1988), S95-S120.
Corcoran, Mary, Roger Gordon, Deborah Laren, and Gary Solon, "The Association
between Men's Economic Status and Their Family and Community Origins,"
Journal of Human Resources, XXVII (1992), 575-601.

Currie, Janet, and Aaron Yelowitz, "Are Public Housing Projects Good for Kids?"
Journal of Public Economics, LXXV (2000), 99-124.
Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser, "Are Ghettos Good or Bad?" Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 827-872.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

652 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob Vigdor, "The Rise and Decline of
the American Ghetto," Journal of Political Economy, CVII (1999), 455-506.
Danziger, Sandra et al., "Barriers to the Employment of Welfare Recipients,"
unpublished manuscript, Poverty Research and Training Center, University
of Michigan, April 1999.
Duncan, Greg J., James P. Connell, and Pamela K. Klebanov, "Conceptual and
Methodological Issues in Estimating Causal Effects of Neighborhoods and

Family Conditions on Individual Development," in Jeanne Brooks-Gunn,

Greg Duncan, and J. Lawrence Aber, eds., Neighborhood Poverty, Volume 1
(New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997), pp. 219-250.
Epp, Gayle, "Emerging Strategies for Revitalizing Public Housing Communities,"
Housing Policy Debate, VII (1996), 563-588.
Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab, "Measuring Peer
Group Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior," Journal of Political Economy,
C (1992), 966-991.
Feins, Judith D., et al., Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration:
Program Operations Manual (Rockville, MD: HUD USER, 1994).
Gaviria, Alejandro, and Stephen Raphael, "School Based Peer Effects and Juvenile Behavior," University of California, San Diego, Department of Economics
Working Paper No. 97/21, 1999.
Gelber, L. E. et al., "Sensitization and Exposure to Indoor Allergens as Risk
Factors for Asthma among Patients Presenting to Hospital," American Review of Respiratory Disease, CLXXIV (1993), 573-578.
Gelfand, Donna M., et al., "The Effect of Maternal Depression on Children,"
Clinical Psychology Review, X (1990), 329-353.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Jos6 A. Scheinkman, "Measuring Social Interactions,"

unpublished paper, Harvard University, August 1999.
Glaeser, Edward L., David I. Laibson, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Christine L.
Soutter, "Measuring Trust," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV (August
2000), 811-846.
Goering, John, et al., Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration
Program: Current Status and Initial Findings (Washington, DC: U. S. De-

partment of Housing and Urban Development, 1999).
Groves, Betsy McCalister et al., "Silent Victims: Children Who Witness Violence,"

Journal of the American Medical Association, CCLXIX (1993), 262-264.
Hanratty, Maria, Sara McLanahan, and Becky Pettit, "The Impact of the Los
Angeles Moving to Opportunity Program on Residential Mobility, Neighborhood Characteristics, and Early Child and Parent Outcomes," unpublished
paper, Princeton University, April 1998.
Harel, Yossi, et al., "The Effects of Recall on Estimating Annual Nonfatal Injury
Rates for Children and Adolescents," American Journal of Public Health,
LXXXIV (April 1994), 599-605.

Heckman, James J., Robert LaLonde, and Jeffrey Smith, "The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Policies," in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A (Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1999).
Idler, Ellen L., and Yael Benyamini, "Self-Rated Health and Mortality: A Review
of Twenty-Seven Community Studies," Journal of Health and Social Behavior, XXXVIII (1997), 21-37.
Jacob, Brian, "Public Housing, Residential Relocation and Student Outcomes: The
Impact of Public Housing Demolition in Chicago," unpublished paper, University of Chicago, May 2000.
Jargowsky, Paul A., "Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in U. S.
Metropolitan Areas," American Sociological Review, LXI (1996), 984-998.
, Poverty and Place (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997).
Jencks, Christopher, and Susan E. Mayer, "The Social Consequences of Growing
up in a Poor Neighborhood," in Laurence E. Lynn, Jr. and Michael G. H.
McGeary, eds., Inner-City Poverty in the United States (Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 1990), pp. 111-186.
Kain, John F., "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization," Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXXVII (1968), 175-197.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. King, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, "The Early Impact

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY IN BOSTON 653

of Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Final Report to the U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development," unpublished paper, National Bureau of
Economic Research, February 2000.

Kessler, Ronald C. et al., "The World Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview Short-Form," International Journal of Methods in
Psychiatric Research, VII (1998), 171-185.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Bullets Don't Got
No Name: Consequences of Fear in the Ghetto," unpublished paper, National
Bureau of Economic Research, January 2001.
Kornfeld, Robert, and Howard S. Bloom, "Measuring Impacts on Earnings and
Employment: Do Unemployment Insurance Wage Reports from Employers
Agree with Surveys of Individuals?" Journal of Labor Economics, XVII (1999),
168-197.

Lazear, Edward, "Intergenerational Externalities," Canadian Journal of Economics, XVI (1983), 212-218.

Leventhal, Tama, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, "Moving to Opportunity: What about
the Kids?" unpublished paper, Columbia University, March 2000.
Lucas, Robert E., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of
Monetary Economics, XXII (February 1988), 3-42.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, and Joshua C. Pinkston, "Neighborhood Effects on
Economic Self-Sufficiency: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Mobility
Experiment," unpublished paper, Georgetown University, January 2000.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, and Paul Hirschfield, "Urban Poverty and Juvenile
Crime: Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (May 2001), 655-679.
Manski, Charles F., "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem," Review of Economic Studies, LX (1993), 531-542.

, "Economic Analysis of Social Interactions," Journal of Economic Perspec-

tives, XIV (2000), 115-136.

Moffitt, Robert A., "Policy Interventions, Low-level Equilibria, and Social Interactions," in Steven Durlauf and Peyton Young, eds., Social Dynamics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000) forthcoming.
Nelson, Christopher B., Ronald C. Kessler, and Daniel Mroczek, "Scoring the
World Health Organization's Composite International Diagnostic Interview
Short Form," unpublished paper, World Health Organization, 1998.
Peroff, Kathleen A. et al., Gautreaux Housing Demonstration: An Evaluation of Its
Impact on Participating Households (Washington, DC: U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, 1979).
Putnam, Robert D., "Bowling Alone: America's Declining Social Capital," Journal
of Democracy, VI (1995), 65-78.
Quigley, John M., "Housing Allowances and Demand-Oriented Housing Subsidies," in Roger Montgomery and Dale Rogers Marshall, eds., Housing Policies
for the 1980s (Lexington, MA: Heath and Company, 1980).
Quinlan, Kyran P., "Injury Control in Practice," Archives of Pediatrics Adolescent
Medicine, CL (1996), 954-957.

Rosenbaum, James E., "Changing the Geography of Opportunity by Expanding

Residential Choice: Lessons from the Gautreaux Program," Housing Policy
Debate, VI (1995), 231-269.

Rosenbaum, James E., and Susan Popkin, "Employment and Earnings of LowIncome Blacks Who Move to Middle-Class Suburbs," in Christopher Jencks
and Paul Peterson, eds., The Urban Underclass (Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution, 1991).

Sacerdote, Bruce, "Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (May 2001), 681-704.
Sharfstein, Joshua et al., Not Safe at Home (Boston: Boston Medical Center,
1998).

Suh, Eunkook, Ed Deiner, and Frank Fujita, "Events and Subjective Well-Being:
Only Recent Events Matter," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
LXX (1996), 1091-1102.

Thurston, George D., "Ozone, Particulate Matter Substantially Raise Asthma
Morbidity and Mortality," summary of presentation to the ALA/ATS International Conference in San Francisco, May 17-21, 1997.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

654 QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
Von Hoffman, Alexander, "High Ambitions: The Past and Future of American
Low-Income Housing Policy," Housing Policy Debate, VII (Washington, DC:
Fannie Mae Foundation, 1996).
Ware, John E., Jr. et al., SF-36 Health Survey: Manual and Interpretation Guide
(Boston: New England Medical Center, 1994).
Weiss, K. B. et al., "Inner-city Asthma: The Epidemiology of an Emerging U. S.

Public Health Concern," Chest, CI (1992), 362-367.

Weissman, M. et al., "Psychopathology of Children Ages 6-10 of Depressed and

Normal Parents," Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry,

XXIII (1984), 78-84.

Weitzman, M. et al., "Racial, Social, and Environmental Risk for Childhood

Asthma," American Journal of Diseases of Children, CXLIV (1992),

1189-1194.
Wilson, William Julius, The Truly Disadvantaged (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1987).
Wright, Rosalind J., "Review of Psychosocial Stress and Asthma: An Integrated
Biopsychosocial Approach," Thorax, LIII (1998), 1066-1074.
Zelon, Harvey et al., Survey of Public Housing Residents: Crime and Crime
Prevention in Public Housing (Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute, 1994).

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Thu, 17 Oct 2019 15:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

