J Clin Epidemiol Vol. 52, No. 1, pp. 19–26, 1999
Copyright © 1999 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

0895-4356/99/ $–see front matter
PII S0895-4356(98)00138-3

Stratified Randomization for Clinical Trials
Walter N. Kernan,1,* Catherine M. Viscoli,1 Robert W. Makuch,2
Lawrence M. Brass,2,3,5 and Ralph I. Horwitz1,2
Departments of 1Internal Medicine, 2Epidemiology and Public Health, and 3Neurology,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; and 5Veterans Administration
Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut
ABSTRACT. Trialists argue about the usefulness of stratified randomization. For investigators designing trials
and readers who use them, the argument has created uncertainty regarding the importance of stratification. In
this paper, we review stratified randomization to summarize its purpose, indications, accomplishments, and
alternatives. In order to identify research papers, we performed a Medline search for 1966–1997. The search
yielded 33 articles that included original research on stratification or included stratification as the major focus.
Additional resources included textbooks. Stratified randomization prevents imbalance between treatment groups
for known factors that influence prognosis or treatment responsiveness. As a result, stratification may prevent
type I error and improve power for small trials (,400 patients), but only when the stratification factors have a
large effect on prognosis. Stratification has an important effect on sample size for active control equivalence
trials, but not for superiority trials. Theoretical benefits include facilitation of subgroup analysis and interim
analysis. The maximum desirable number of strata is unknown, but experts argue for keeping it small. Stratified
randomization is important only for small trials in which treatment outcome may be affected by known clinical
factors that have a large effect on prognosis, large trials when interim analyses are planned with small numbers of
patients, and trials designed to show the equivalence of two therapies. Once the decision to stratify is made,
investigators need to chose factors carefully and account for them in the analysis. J CLIN EPIDEMIOL 52;1:19–26,
1999. © 1999 Elsevier Science Inc.
KEY WORDS. Stratified randomization, stratification, efficiency, review, power, randomized clinical trials

INTRODUCTION
Stratified randomization is a two-stage procedure in which
patients who enter a clinical trial are first grouped into
strata according to clinical features that may influence outcome risk. Within each stratum, patients are then assigned
to a treatment according to separate randomization schedules [1]. For example, patients over age 65 years may be randomized separately from patients under 65. Although stratification is very commonly used for clinical trials,
investigators and readers are often uncertain about its importance. Contributing to the controversy and doubt about
stratification, trialists still debate its merits and necessity
[1–4] and authors who write guidelines for reading and reporting clinical trials [5,6] often do not mention it.
In this paper, we describe current knowledge about stratified randomization and summarize its accomplishments,
indications, risks, and alternatives. Our purpose is to go beyond older reviews [1,3,7] that have focused on limited as*Address for correspondence: Dr. Walter N. Kernan, Primary Care Center, Yale-New Haven Hospital, 20 York Street, New Haven, CT 06504.
Accepted for publication on 1 September 1998.

pects of the procedure for biostatistical audiences. Our review is a comprehensive summary written for a broad
audience of clinicians and clinical investigators. We conclude with a set of guidelines to help investigators know
when to stratify randomization and to help readers know
when to look for it.

METHODS
Sources of Information on Stratification
To identify major research on the theory and practice of
stratification, we performed Medline searches on databases
for 1966–1997 using the MESH terms research design, random allocation, randomized clinical trials, and textwords stratification, efficiency, and power. We identified 1225 Englishlanguage references. The titles and abstracts of each were
scanned on-line to identify 33 that included original research on stratification or included stratification as the major focus. The selected articles were read and searched for
additional references. Additional sources of information included textbooks on randomized clinical trials (RCT) [7,8]
and their bibliographies.

W. N. Kernan et al.

20

RESULTS
Definition of Stratified Randomization
Randomization procedures for clinical trials are intended to
create groups of patients that are similar with regard to
baseline characteristics that influence prognosis (both
known and unknown) other than the treatment being considered. Observed differences between groups in endpoint
rates may then be attributed to the treatments rather than
to other prognostic features. In simple (or complete) randomization [9–11], investigators make up a single randomization list before the trial is begun. Each consecutive patient enrolled receives the next treatment assignment on
the list.
Simple randomization can fail in two important ways.
First, it can fail to assign the compared treatments to equal
numbers of patients. To avoid this chance imbalance, investigators commonly randomize patients in permuted
blocks [8]. A block usually comprises four or six randomly
ordered treatment assignments. Within each block, equal
numbers of patients receive each treatment. For example, if
two treatments, A and B, are being compared, the permuted blocks of four treatment assignments would be
AABB, ABAB, BBAA, BABA, ABBA, and BAAB. As patients enter the trial, they receive the next treatment in the
current block. Patients are randomized within block after
block until the study is complete. With permuted blocks of
size four, the number of patients assigned to each treatment
within a block can never differ by more than two.
Second, simple randomization can fail if it creates treated
groups of patients that are unbalanced for critical features
that are known or suspected to affect prognosis. Significant
imbalance is most likely to happen in small trials where
chance may result in sicker patients being in one treatment
arm than in another. It may also occur for large trials at the
time of interim analyses when the full sample size has not
been obtained. Finally, it may occur for trials with prolonged recruitment periods, if changes occur over time in
prognostic characteristics of enrolled patients.
To illustrate the chance that simple (unstratified) randomization may lead to treatment groups that are unbalanced with respect to a prognostic factor, consider a trial of
two therapies in a disease with an important prognostic factor that is present in 15% of patients. The chance that the
two treatment groups will differ by more than 10% for the
proportion of patients with the prognostic factor is 33% for
a trial of 30 patients, 24% for a trial of 50 patients, 10% for
a trial of 100 patients, 3% for a trial of 200 patients, and
0.3% for a trial of 400 patients (Table 1). The chance of an
imbalance is greater when prognostic factors are present in
30% of patients than when they are present in 15%.
Just as blocking addresses the first potential failure of
randomization, stratified randomization is intended to prevent the second (imbalance for prognostic features) [12]. In
practice, the two procedures are often used together when
randomization is blocked within strata. Stratified random-

Probability that simple randomization will result
in two treatment groups that differ by more than 10% for
the proportion of patients with a prognostic factor according to the prevalence of the factor in the whole cohorta
TABLE 1.

Total no. of patients
in the trial
30
50
100
200
400
a Calculated

Probability of 10% difference
according to prevalence of
the prognostic factor in
the entire study cohort
15%

30%

33%
24%
10%
3%
0.3%

43%
38%
27%
9%
2%

in a simulation study involving 10,000 hypothetical trials.

ization is accomplished by identifying stratification factors
before research is begun. Examples include age, research
center (in a multicenter trial), and disease severity. Each
factor may have two or more levels. The total number of
strata is the product of the number of levels of each factor.
For example, a study that stratifies by two age levels (,65
years, $65 years), three hospitals, and four levels of disease
severity will have a total of 24 strata (2 3 3 3 4). As patients are enrolled, investigators determine the stratum to
which they belong. Treatment assignments are then made
from separate randomization lists created in advance of the
trial for each stratum.
Potential Advantages of Stratification
ASSURANCE THAT COMPARED GROUPS ARE SIMILAR WITH RESPECT
TO KNOWN PROGNOSTIC FACTORS.

The defining purpose of
stratified randomization is to provide greater assurance that
compared groups are similar with respect to known prognostic features other than treatment [1,9,10,12–14]. Based
on data such as that in Table 1, authorities commonly believe that for small trials (i.e., with ,100 patients [9]), stratification is critical to assure a valid comparison [14]. As trial
size increases, the risk for randomization-associated imbalances diminishes. Some authorities [3,4] argue that the risk
diminishes so much for large trials that stratification is not
necessary.
PROTECTION AGAINST TYPE I ERROR. The effect of stratification on the occurrence of type I error (symbolized by a) has
been described [15,16]. Type I error refers to the possibility
of observing a difference in outcome rates between two
treatment groups when the two treatments are equally effective (i.e., false positive). A falsely positive trial could occur if the randomization process allocates patients between
treatment groups such that patients in the active treatment
group have a better prognosis than patients in the comparison group.

Stratified Randomization

21

Feinstein and Landis [15] provided an empiric demonstration that stratification reduces the probability of finding
a statistically significant (P , 0.05) or clinically significant
difference (10% absolute difference) between two treatment groups when none exists. To show the effect of stratification on the possibility of type I error, Table 2 excerpts
their results. For trials with unstratified randomization, the
erroneous finding of a statistically significant (P , 0.05)
difference between treatments occurred about 50 of 1,000
times in their computer simulation, regardless of endpoint
rates in the constituent strata or sample size. With stratification, the frequency of an erroneous result was also about
50 out of 1,000 trials when the difference in fatality rates
between stratum was 20% or less. As the difference in the
interstratum fatality rates increased, the frequency of detecting a statistically significant difference fell dramatically.
Under assumptions of unequal proportions of patients in
each stratum, Feinstein and Landis showed in a separate
analysis that the effect of stratification in reducing type I
error was maintained [15]. Conclusions that emerge from
this work are that stratification helps to prevent type I error
for trials with up to 400 patients (they did not examine the
effect in larger trials) but only when the absolute difference
in endpoint rates between strata exceeds 20%.
PROTECTION AGAINST TYPE II ERROR (INCREASED POWER).
Type II error (symbolized by b) refers to the possibility of
failing to detect a difference that truly exists between two
treatment groups (false-negative result). Investigators refer
to the quantity, 1-b, as statistical power. A highly powered
study (i.e., power .80%) has a greater probability of de-

TABLE 2.

tecting a specified treatment effect at any level of statistical
significance (usually P , 0.05). Power is inversely related
to variance of the difference between two means or rates,
whichever is being compared. Stratification reduces that
variance [17,18] and, theoretically, should increase power.
Only a few studies have examined the effect of stratified
randomization on the power of an RCT [16,19,20]. Although trialists commonly believe that stratified randomization has no important effect on power for large RCTs
[21], none of the published accounts provide a direct
demonstration to confirm this opinion. For RCTs of 100
or fewer patients, direct demonstrations are available
[16,19,20]. Green and Byar [19] examined the effect of
stratification on the power of trials with 100 subject. Under
varying assumptions, stratified randomization with an adjusted analysis (compared to no stratification with an unadjusted analysis), increased power by up to 12%. The greatest
increases occurred for therapies with a large treatment effect
(over 10% absolute endpoint difference between treatment
groups) and for stratification factors that strongly affected
endpoint risk (creating groups with a $30% difference for
endpoint rates). We are unaware of any report that has examined the influence of stratification on power for trials including over 100 patients or using greater than 5 strata.
Lachin and Bautista [20] recently published an analysis
that confirms Green and Byar’s findings. They compared
the power of a stratified-adjusted analysis for the difference
between two proportions with an unstratified and unadjusted analysis. Their results show that power is reduced
only when there is a marked imbalance in both the distribution of covariates between risk groups and a marked dif-

Demonstration of the effect of stratification on type I error a
Sample size 100

Fatality rates in constituent strata
0% difference
50% & 50%
20% difference
40% & 60%
30% & 50%
20% & 40%
10% & 30%
40% difference
30% & 70%
20% & 60%
10% & 50%
60% difference
20% & 80%
10% & 70%
80% difference
10% & 90%

Sample size 400

Stratified
randomization

Unstratified
randomization

Stratified
randomization

Unstratified
randomization

51

55

47

59

56
43
53
43

42
48
49
40

52
42
55
52

59
40
50
48

24
27
28

47
55
54

35
32
38

43
46
50

15
10

59
46

9
14

52
51

2

60

3

50

a Out of 1000 times that a trial is conducted for an ineffective therapy, the numbers refer to the times that a trial shows a significant difference (P , 0.05)
for fatality rates between the actively treated group and the control group.
Data is from Feinstein AR, Landis JR. The role of prognostic statification in preventing the bias permitted by random allocation of treatment. J Chronic
Dis 1976; 29:277–284. Reproduced with permission from the publisher and author.

22

ference between strata (defined by covariates) for treatment
responsiveness. They conclude that, because randomization
reliably protects against severe imbalance in the distribution of a covariate among treatment groups, sample size and
power calculations need not take account of stratified randomization.
INCREASED EFFICIENCY. By efficiency, we are referring to
the number of patients that are required to detect a difference in two treatments at a prespecified power and level of
statistical significance. A more efficient trial will require
fewer patients to have sufficient power (usually 80 or 90%)
to detect an important difference between two treatments at
a certain level of significance (usually 0.05). Power and efficiency are directly related. For a specific treatment difference and significance level, a more highly powered trial will
require more patients and a larger trial will have more
power. Because of this direct relationship, the research cited
above for power also applies to efficiency. When stratification improves power, it also reduces the required sample size.
Unfortunately, the magnitude of the benefit of stratified
randomization on efficiency has been examined and demonstrated in only in a limited number of studies [22,23].
Palta [23] compared sample size requirements for trails with
and without stratified randomization. She assumed that
even without stratified randomization, the main analysis for
treatment effectiveness would be adjusted for convariates.
Under a range of assumptions about treatment effectiveness
and differences between strata for outcome risk, power
losses from failure to stratify randomization could be made
up by adding 6–14 patients to a trial.
Palta’s work concerned conventional (superiority) trials
in which investigators are interested in showing that one
treatment is superior to another. In studies designed to
demonstrate the equivalence of two treatments, stratification has been shown to have a greater effect in reducing
sample size [22]. In a recent report, Nam [22] showed that,
over a range of assumptions, stratified randomization may
reduce the total sample size requirement for equivalence
trials by 12–42%. For example, in a trial with 80% power to
demonstrate that a decrease in outcome rate by a new, less
toxic therapy is no more than 5% compared to a standard
therapy, stratified randomization reduces that sample size
by 20% from 1707 to 1373. This example assumes outcome
rates of 10% and 30% among patients in stratum one and
two, respectively, who receive the standard therapy.
In practice, investigators rarely take account of stratification in calculating sample size. Rather, they regard stratification as providing a margin of security in sample size estimates. The trade off, of course, is security that the trial will
be adequately sized for cost savings that could be realized
with smaller samples.
FACILITATION OF SUBGROUP ANALYSIS. Investigators
often
want to know if patients respond differently to a treatment

W. N. Kernan et al.

depending on prerandomization characteristics, such as risk
for the study outcome. These inquiries can lead to important findings that a treatment has a greater effect in some
patients than in others. For example, a subgroup analysis
from the Veterans Administration Randomized Study of
Surgery for Coronary Arterial Occlusive Disease [24]
showed that surgery improved survival among 113 patients
with left main coronary artery disease. Surgery for these patients immediately became standard therapy, even before
the finding of a benefit was confirmed by another subgroup
analysis from another trial [25].
The performance and interpretation of data from subgroup analysis, however, is highly controversial [26,27]. Detractors argue that results of subgroup analyses are often
misleading. For example, they can fail to detect important
treatment effects because of lack of power (false negative).
Subgroup analyses, furthermore, can identify treatment effects that do not actually exist (type I error leading to a
false positive result). The possibility of type I error is high
in subgroup analyses because authors often simultaneously
examine treatment effects within many subgroups. For example, among 10 equally sized subgroups defined by prespecified strata, the probability of finding a difference that
is significant at the P , 0.05 level among treatment groups
within at least one stratum is 40%.
Defenders argue that subgroup analysis can identify differential effects of a treatment that are important for hypothesis generation and management of individual patients. As in the case of surgery for left main coronary artery
disease, findings for a significant association within subgroups may be true and not just the result of type I error. To
account for type I error, furthermore, investigators may simply reduce the probability value for defining statistical significance. A simple method divides the customary value of
P 5 0.05 by the number of subgroups [27]. To account for
limitations of power, investigators may report the power of
the subgroup analysis (given the obtained sample size) to
detect the observed (or another) treatment effect.
A balanced assessment of subgroup analysis recognizes
that, if executed and interpreted properly, it can be valuable. In addition to setting an appropriate P value, another
principle of execution is to identify subgroups before the
trial is started [26,27]. When authors define subgroups before a trial is started, readers know that the finding of a
treatment effect within a subgroup is less likely to be the
chance result of a search for statistical association among
multiple comparisons [28]. The possibility that an observed
association is the result of type I error is reduced. Readers
are more confident, furthermore, that the subgroups are derived from biological reasoning or prior observations [28].
What does this have to do with stratified randomization?
Stratified randomization forces investigators to identify
subgroups before the start of a study. As importantly, when
used with blocking, stratification helps to assure that treatment assignments within subgroups are balanced. Each sub-

Stratified Randomization

group becomes a small trial. With the knowledge that patients within a subgroup are presumed similar in all regards
except treatment, investigators can draw valid inferences
about treatment effectiveness within subgroups [14].
FACILITATION OF INTERIM ANALYSES. Interim analyses are
typically conducted before enrollment is completed, when
sample size may be small. Because imbalances between treatment groups for prognostic variables are most likely to occur
with small samples, stratification may enhance the validity
of an interim analysis and increase power to detect a difference between treatment groups at a specified level of significance [1,7]. The improvements in validity and power may
apply to the detection of both beneficial treatment effects
and adverse events. Safety monitoring may be improved.
PROTECTION AGAINST EFFECTS OF RECRUITMENT CENTER DROPOUT.

Stratification on recruitment center (with blocking)
assures that patients in each center are balanced for treatment assignment. In a stratified trial, therefore, withdrawal
of a center will not result in an imbalance among remaining
patients [11].
Choice of Stratification Factors
Fewer strata are better. Investigators have been encouraged
to be parsimonious in selecting stratification factors and the
levels that define strata [29]. With fewer strata, there will
be more patients in each stratum, and this has four important advantages for clinical trial design [30]. First, it simplifies randomization and trial administration. In this age of
computers and central trial coordination, this is not an important advantage. Of greater importance is that it can improve statistical efficiency by making it more likely that
equal numbers of patients are assigned to each treatment
[7,9]. In a permuted block randomization scheme, when
there are few patients in many strata, some strata will have
no blocks completed. By chance, if the first treatment assignments in several blocks are the same, imbalances will
occur between treatment groups. This problem of too many
strata and incomplete filling of blocks has been termed
overstratification [13]. The third advantage to fewer strata is
to assure equal distribution of the stratification factor between treatment groups (i.e., to achieve the purpose of
stratification). In simulation models, Pocock and Simon
[29,31] have shown that increasing stratification can be
self-defeating. Imbalances for prognostic variables can occur between treatment groups as a result of incomplete filling of permuted blocks within strata. Fourth, limiting the
number of strata avoids the problem of multiple comparisons [27] that may occur if investigators report outcome
rates separately by numerous strata.
The definition of parsimony and the maximum number
of strata that is appropriate for any trial cannot be fixed easily to a specific number. Although authorities have pro-

23

posed that more than 3 or 4 strata are seldom adviseable
[32], the maximum appropriate number of strata depends
on the total number of patients in the trial, the expected
number who will be in each strata, and the importance of
the stratification factors. The number of strata is the product of the number of levels of each factor. With just four
factors, each having two levels, 16 strata are possible. To assure parsimony, investigators are encouraged to select only
those clinical variables that have a known and important
effect on outcome risk or treatment responsiveness.
According to one estimation [33], the benefit of stratified
randomization is eliminated unless the number of strata is
appreciably less than N/B, where N is the total sample size
and B is the block size. Based on this estimate (until definitive research is available), we suggest that the number of
strata be maintained at less than n/(B 3 4), where n is the
sample size at the first planned interim analysis and 4 is a
safety factor that accounts for unequal distribution of patients among strata. For a trial of 1,000 patients using randomization blocks of size 4 and with an interim look after
500 are enrolled, this formula would suggest a maximum of
31 strata. When blocking is not used, the number of strata
should be restricted as necessary to assure an adequate number of patients in each stratum and, therefore, balanced treatment assignment within strata. Based on probabilities for
unbalanced treatment assignments [11], we believe that the
appropriate number of strata is between n/50 and n/100 to
assure an average of 50–100 patients/strata. To account for
unequal distribution of patients among strata, investigators
may further reduce the number of strata by multiplying the
provisional number of strata (e.g., n/60) by the ratio of the
number of patients anticipated in the smallest stratum compared to the average stratum. Although we cautiously propose this guideline for unblocked trials, we recommend
blocking over simple randomization. Blocking will provide
greater assurance of balanced treatment assignment within
strata, especially when strata are small.
When available, multivariate prediction instruments
may be advantageous for stratification [18]. Three distinct
advantages of multivariate systems are that they are more
reliable than single-variable systems, achieve greater distinctions among patients for endpoint risk, and minimize
the number of strata. Multivariate systems are more reliable
because they comprise several predictive variables. In a particular cohort of stroke patients, for example, one well-documented predictive variable (e.g., age over 65 years) may
not influence risk for recurrent stroke, but combinations of
variables may still work (e.g., age over 65 and diabetes).
The second advantage of multivariate systems is that they
may achieve greater distinction among risk groups than individual variables. This occurs because the individual variables that comprise multivariate systems often have summative or synergistic effects on outcome risk. The third
advantage of multivariate systems is to reduce the number
of strata [18]. For example, if 6 dichotomous clinical vari-

W. N. Kernan et al.

24

ables affect outcome risk, 64 strata are possible. A multivariate system based on these six variables might condense
them into three strata.
Special Analytic Procedures for Stratified Data
The analysis of results from trials with stratified randomization should take account of the stratification [3]. The special analytic procedure is simply to include the stratification factor as a covariate in whatever multivariate model is
chosen. Failure to account for stratification in the analysis
will result in an overestimation of the P value for a difference between endpoint rates in treatment groups [3]; the
finding of a large P value (.0.05) may cause an investigator
to erroneously accept the null hypothesis (type II error).
Potential Disadvantages of Stratification
As long as the number of strata is kept small, relative to the
size of the study, there is usually no disadvantage to stratification. Problems associated with too many strata were described previously.
For trials of therapies that require emergency administration, however, stratification may pose an unwarranted administrative burden. In a study of vasopressin compared
with epinephrine for out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation
[34], for example, emergency response crews administered
randomly assigned treatment in the field under a blind design. Upon encountering a patient who failed to revive
with direct-current shocks, a crew member reached for the
next prefilled syringe in a research packet. Stratification
based on patient-specific characteristics might have added
undue complexity to field operations or delayed care.
Alternatives to Stratified Randomization
Alternatives to stratified randomization include minimization and poststratification. Minimization uses information
about patients who are already in a trial to influence treatment assignment for new patients in such a way that differences between treatment groups are minimized [8,31,35]. In
the simplest case of a trial comparing two treatments, consider an investigator who wants to balance groups on just
one known prognostic variable. A person not involved with
clinical management (or a computer) classifies each prospective trial participant with respect to that variable. The
frequency of the variable in each of the two treatment
groups is checked. If the variable is equally distributed, then
the next patient is randomly assigned to one of the two
treatments. If the variable is not equally distributed, then
the new patient is assigned to even out the distribution.
When more than one prognostic variable must be considered, minimization can be used by considering each variable separately and assigning patients to minimize the overall difference in a summary score. Pocock and Simon [31]

have shown that minimization may be more effective than
stratification in balancing treatment assignments across
prognostic factors when trials are small (,100 patients)
and many (.3) prognostic factors are considered. Both procedures produce comparable improvements in reducing
type I error and power [16]. One disadvantage of minimization, however, is that it can be cumbersome to implement
[1], especially in conjunction with a restrictive procedure
like blocking.
Another alternative to stratified randomization is to adjust the analysis for treatment effectiveness for covariates
using multivariate analysis (poststratification) [36]. At the
conclusion of a trial, the outcome rates between treatment
groups are compared in a multivariate model. Outcome
rates or time to outcome are adjusted for baseline patient
characteristics (covariates) that investigators believe may
influence treatment outcome. Published efforts to compare
stratified randomization (with adjustment) with adjustment
alone (poststratification) suggest that the two procedures
are comparably precise for estimating treatment contrasts
when the trial size exceeds 100 patients [36]. As discussed
above, losses in power and efficiency from failure to stratify
randomization are insignificant if poststratification is used
[3,23,37]. We are unaware of research comparing pre- and
poststratification with greater than five strata.
Use of adjustment without stratified randomization,
however, is controversial. Investigators have demonstrated
that choice of covariates may influence the research conclusions [38]. Because choice of covariates is at the discretion of investigators, research conclusions are susceptible to
manipulation and error. To preserve the integrity of the
analysis, investigators may specify covariates in advance of
the research or use objective rules for their selection. Still,
readers are often skeptical of analytic adjustment procedures. Prestratification, therefore, may be helpful to persuade readers that research results are correct [1].
DISCUSSION
Stratification is a simple method of restricted randomization that is harmless always, useful frequently, and important rarely. It is harmless because it will not cause greater
imbalance in the distribution of stratification factors among
treatment groups than would be expected by chance in a
nonstratified scheme. It is frequently useful because it can
reduce both types I and II error, improve trial efficiency,
and facilitate both subgroup analysis and interim analyses.
The only circumstances in which stratification is important, however, are for small trials in which treatment outcome may be affected by known clinical factors that have a
large effect on prognosis, large trials when interim analyses
are planned with small numbers of patients, and trials designed to show the equivalence of two therapies.
Development of clear guidelines for use of stratification
is made difficult by the absence of more research demon-

Stratified Randomization

strating its effect on power, efficiency, and precision of the
estimate for treatment effectiveness. Available research establishes that effects do exist, but investigators need confirmation and clarification of published findings. For example,
the finding that stratified randomization has a large effect
on sample size requirements for active control equivalence
studies is potentially important, but has not been confirmed. Rules to govern the maximum number of strata also
require confirmation. Further research will help investigators make confident judgments about when the marginal
benefits of stratification are sufficiently small to forgo it.
Based on the information that is available, we offer a set
of 10 guidelines for clinical investigators (Table 3). The
first three concern when to stratify. We generally concur
with Peto [3] and others that stratification is not necessary
for very large superiority trials (seeking to demonstrate the
superiority of one therapy over another). We do recommend stratification for small superiority trials with less than
400 patients. We chose 400 for two reasons: First, our calculations (Table 1) show that important imbalance will occur only rarely (0.3–2% of the time) as a result of forgoing
stratification for trials of more than 400 patients. Second,
important benefits of stratification in terms of type I error,
power, or efficiency have been demonstrated only for trials
with less than 400 patients. Even for larger trials, however,
stratified randomization may be important when interim
analyses or subgroup analyses are planned with fewer than
400 patients. For active control equivalence trials, the work
of Nam [22] suggests that randomization should be stratified
even for large sample sizes.
The fourth guideline concerns when to adjust sample size
estimates for stratified randomization. Available research,
cited above, suggests that stratified randomization can have
a significant effect on sample size needs for active control
equivalence trials, but not for conventional trials. Although we recommend adjusting for stratification in the

25

later, this will not be practical until commercial software
can do the task.
Guidelines 5–7 concern choice of stratification factors.
Factors that create greater discrimination among patients
for outcome risk accomplish the work of stratification more
effectively [15,19,20]. When factors with a large prognostic
effect ($20% absolute rate difference) are not known or
readily available, stratification becomes less important. Because single stratification factors rarely achieve this magnitude of effect, multivariable systems may be advantageous.
To avoid overstratification, keep the number of strata
small. Until definitive rules are established by research, we
suggest that the number should be less than n/(B 3 4),
where n 5 number of patients in the trial at the first
planned interim analysis and B 5 the block size.
Guidelines 8–10 concern alternatives and reporting requirements. Minimization may be preferable to stratification when research must take account of numerous variables that affect prognosis or treatment responsiveness.
Poststratification is essentially equivalent to stratification
for sample sizes over 100 patients when 5 or fewer strata are
considered. We believe that investigators should be encouraged, but not compelled, to report whether or not stratification was used. Readers do not need to know about stratification to interpret the results of a trial; they can check
tables of baseline features to see whether comparability of
treatment groups was achieved. If there is a reason to require reporting of stratification, it is to explain imbalances
in treatment groups for important features and to facilitate
research about clinical trials.
Founded by grant 1-R01-N531251-03 from the National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke. The authors are grateful to Peter N.
Peduzzi, PhD for his thoughtful review of an earlier draft of our manuscript and to Dr. John M. Lachin for his guidance through recent literature on the effect of stratified randomization on statistical power.

TABLE 3. Guidelines for use and reporting of stratified randomization in clinical trials

1. For superiority trials that seek to demonstrate the superiority of one therapy over another,
consider stratified randomization when the overall sample size for a trial is small (,200 patients
per treatment arm) or when interim analyses or subgroup analyses are planned that will involve
small samples of a larger cohort.
2. Stratification is probably unnecessary for large superiority trials (.200 patients per treatment
arm) that will not involve interim or subgroup analyses.
3. For active control equivalence trials that seek to demonstrate the equivalence of compared
therapies, consider stratified randomization even for very large sample sizes.
4. When planning an active control equivalence trial (but not a conventional trial), sample size
estimates should be adjusted for stratified randomization.
5. Choose stratification factors that identify groups with large differences in outcome rates.
6. Use multivariable prediction systems as stratification factors when available.
7. Keep the number of strata as small as possible.
8. Minimization may be preferable to stratification when research must take account of numerous
variables (.4) that affect prognosis or treatment responsiveness.
9. Poststratification is probably equivalent to stratified randomization for large trials (.200
patients per treatment arm) with five or fewer strata.
10. Reporting use of stratified randomization is optional.

26

References
1. Simon R. Restricted randomization designs in clinical trials.
Biometrics 1979; 35: 503–512.
2. Lachin JM, Matts JP, Wei LJ. Randomization in clinical trials:
Conclusions and recommendations. Control Clin Trials
1988; 9: 365–374.
3. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of
randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of
each patient. Br J Cancer 1976; 34: 585.
4. Meier P. Stratification in the design of a clinical trial. Control
Clin Trials 1981; 1: 355–361.
5. The Standards of Reporting Trials Group. A Proposal for
structured reporting of randomized controlled trials. JAMA
1994; 272: 196–1931.
6. Begg C, Cho M, Eastwood S, Horton R, Moher D, Olkin I,
Pitkin R, Rennie D, Schulz KF, Simel D, Stroup OF. Improving the quality of reporting of randomized controlled trials:
The CONSORT Statement. JAMA 1996; 276: 637–639.
7. Pocock SJ. Clinical Trials: A Practical Approach. New York:
John Wiley & Sons; 1983.
8. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, DeMets DL. Fundamentals of
Clinical Trials. 3rd Ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, Inc.; 1996.
9. White SJ, Freedman LS. Allocation of patients to treatment
groups in a controlled clinical study. Br J Cancer 1978; 37:
849–857.
10. Zelen M. The randomization and stratification of patients to
clinical trials. J Chronic Dis 1974; 27: 365–375.
11. Lachin JM. Properties of simple randomization in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1988; 9: 312–326.
12. Hill AB. The clinical trial. Br Med Bull 1951; 7: 278–282.
13. Simon R. Patient subsets and variation in therapeutic efficacy.
Br J Clin Pharmacol 1982; 14: 473–482.
14. Armitage P, Gehan EA. Statistical methods for the identification and use of prognostic factors. Int J Cancer 1974; 13: 16–36.
15. Feinstein AR, Landis JR. The role of prognostic stratification
in preventing the bias permitted by random allocation of
treatment. J Chronic Dis 1976; 29: 277–284.
16. Birkett NJ. Adaptive allocation in randomized controlled trials. Control Clin Trials 1985; 6: 146–155.
17. Grizzle JE. A note on stratifying versus complete random assignment in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1982; 3: 365–368.
18. Miettinen OS. Stratification by a multivariate confounder
score. Am J Epidemiol 1976; 104: 609–620.
19. Green SB, Byar DP. The effect of stratified randomization on
size and power of statistical tests in clinical trials. J Chronic
Dis 1978; 31: 445–454.
20. Lachin JM, Bautista OM. Stratified-adjusted versus unstratified assessment of sample size and power for analyses of proportions. In: Thall PF, Ed. Recent Advances in Clinical Trial
Design and Analysis. Boston: Kluwer; 1995: 258.

W. N. Kernan et al.

21. Lachin JM. Statistical properties of randomization in clinical
trials. Control Clin Trials 1988; 9: 289–311.
22. Nam J-M. Sample size determination in stratified trials to establish the equivalence of two treatments. Stat Med 1995; 14:
2037–2049.
23. Palta M. Investigating maximum power losses in survival studies with nonstratified randomization. Biometrics 1985; 41:
497–504.
24. Takaro T, Hultgren HN, Lipton MJ, Detre KM, Group aPitS.
The VA cooperative randomized study of surgery for coronary
arterial occlusive disease. II. Subgroup with significant left
main lesions. Circulation 1976; 54 (suppl. 3): III-107–III-117.
25. European Coronary Surgery Study Group. Long-term results
of prospective randomized study of coronary artery bypass surgery in stable angina patients. Lancet 1982; 2: 1173.
26. Oxman AD, Guyatt GH. A consumer’s guide to subgroup
analysis. Annals of Intern Med 1992; 116: 78–84.
27. Yusuf S, Wittes J, Probstfield J, Tyroler HA. Analysis and interpretation of treatment effects in subgroups of patients in
randomized clinical trials. JAMA 1991; 266: 93–98.
28. Bulpitt CJ. Subgroup analysis. Lancet 1988; 2: 31–34.
29. Pocock SJ. Allocation of patients to treatment in clinical trials. Biometrics 1979; 35: 183–197.
30. Makuch RW, Johnson MF. Biostatistical considerations for
head and neck cancer research. In: Wolf GT, Ed. Head and
Neck Oncology. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff; 1985: 473–502.
31. Pocock SJ, Simon R. Sequential treatment assignment with
balancing for prognostic factors in the controlled clinical trial.
Biometrics 1975; 31: 103–115.
32. Byar DP, Simon RM, Friedewald WT, Schlesselman JJ,
Demets DL, Ellenberg JH, Gail MH, Ware JH. Randomized
clinical trials: perspectives on some recent ideas. N Engl J
Med 1976; 295: 74–80.
33. Hallstrom A, Davis K. Imbalance in treatment assignments in
stratified block randomization. Control Clin Trials 1988; 9:
375–382.
34. Lindner KH, Dirks B, Strohmenger H, Prengel AW, Lindner
IM, Lurie KG. Randomized comparison of epinephrine and
vasopressin in patients with out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation. Lancet 1997; 349: 535–537.
35. Taves DR. Minimization: A new method of assigning patients
to treatment and control groups. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1974;
15: 443–453.
36. McHugh R, Matts J. Post-stratification in the randomized
clinical trial. Biometrics 1983; 39: 217–225.
37. Palta M. Magnitude and likelihood of loss resulting from nonstratified randomization. Stat Med 1982; 1: 267–275.
38. Beach ML, Meier P. Choosing covariates in the analysis of
clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1989; 10(Suppl 4S): 161s–
175s.

