Adjusting for Nonignorable Drop-Out Using Semiparametric Nonresponse Models:
Comment
Author(s): Nan M. Laird and Donna K. Pauler
Source: Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 94, No. 448 (Dec., 1999), pp.
1133-1135
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of the American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2669929
Accessed: 21-10-2019 14:54 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of the American Statistical Association

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Comment
Nan M. LAIRD and Donna K. PAULER

ciate the point of view that one should continue to specify

1. SELECTION MODELS

and not estimate the parameter ozo. But in the more realis-

Selection models offer an intuitive approach to dealing

tic case where the outcome interacts with covariates in the

with the difficult problem of nonignorable nonresponse. It

nonresponse model, some strategy that combines sensitivity

has long been understood that both the data model and the

analysis with estimation may be desired. To this end, with

nonresponse model are not completely identifiable from

categorical data at least, likelihoods are a very useful way

data, but there has been much difficulty in determining

of exploring goodness of fit and model sensitivity, and we

which particular models can be be estimated from data, and,

feel that the present approach could benefit with some type

for an estimable model, which aspects of the model are well

of objective function that could be used for this purpose.

estimated from data and which aspects are sensitive to the

Another feature of the proposed method also arises with

model assumptions.

maximum likelihood (ML) estimation and categorical vari-

The path taken by the authors is to be completely non-

ables. Baker and Laird (1988) showed that when estimating

parametric in estimating the mean response, assuming noth-

nonignorable nonresponse models for the 2 x 2 x 2 table, the

ing about the parametric distribution of outcome or how it

ML solution will sometime lie on a "boundary" in the sense

depends on the other variables, observed or unobserved;

that all values of the outcome for the nonrespondents will

they assume a semiparametric form for the nonresponse

be "imputed" to be either 0 or 1. A similar phenomenon

model, where the part depending on the observables is al-

was observed in larger tables. Here, even though the model

lowed, where feasible, to be unspecified and then posit a

may be saturated in the sense that the number of parame-

model with known parameters for the dependence of nonre-

ters equals the number of degrees of freedom, there is not

sponse on the unobserved variables. The attractive feature

a perfect fit to the data, in the sense that (O - E) + 0 for

of their approach, at least in relatively simple settings, is

those margins that are observed.

that one fully utilizes the observed data to the maximum

Although the authors are very careful to note through-

extent possible, and the nonresponse parameter (and the as-

out that the resulting estimators depend not only on the

sumed model for nonresponse) can be varied to study sen-

sensitivity parameter, but also on the nonresponse model,

sitivity to assumptions. In most real problems, it will not be

certain features of their analysis of the CD4 data invite the

possible to fully specify the nonresponse model as a func-

reader to feel, as indeed the authors tell us to feel, that "this

tion of observables, and the authors suggest some simpli-

conclusion is quite robust. Significant differential selection

fication of the nonresponse model. However, they continue

biases would have to occur to alter this conclusion" (that

to recommend to specify the parameter determining the de-

AZT + ddi is to be preferred over AZT). The point is, of

pendence of the nonresponse model on the unobserved out-

course, that within the context of the given model, the con-

come, even though there is now some information in the

clusion is robust. One particular feature of their methods

data about this parameter.

that invites this feeling of complacency about the conclu-

Several aspects of this approach are readily understood

sions is the implicit assumption, discussed at length by the

by considering the very simple setting where all of the vari-

authors, that the outcome for a nonresponder is bounded by

ables are categorical, only one variable is subject to nonre-

the outcomes of the responders. In many situations this may

sponse, and there is only one time of nonresponse. For this

not be a reasonable assumption. The other obvious feature

setting, it is straightforward to see that fitting a saturated

of the analysis that is not discussed is that the parameter ozo

model for the data and a nonresponse model that is satu-

may be a vector, and the nonresponse model may depend

rated in the observed variables leaves 0 degrees of freedom

not only on the outcome, but also on its interaction with

in the data for estimating dependence of nonresponse on

observed covariates. Particularly in this example, it would

the outcome subject to missingness (Baker and Laird 1988).

seem desirable to interact time of dropout with outcome in

Still leaving the data model saturated, but putting a struc-

the nonresponse model.

ture on the nonresponse model that is not fully saturated in
the observed covariates, leaves positive degrees of freedom,
which permits estimation of all of the model parameters, al-

2. PATTERN-MIXTURE MODELS

though in practice it can difficult to determine which models

An alternative factorization of the model for complete

are estimable, and the likelihoods may be quite flat. This is

data is the pattern-mixture model, which is briefly intro-

analogous to the authors model B(aco), and we can appre-

duced in Section 7.3.2 but perhaps deserving of more at-

Nan M. Laird is Professor, Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School

? 1999 American Statistical Association

of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115. Donna K. Pauler is Assistant Professor, Biostatistics Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA

Journal of the American Statistical Association

December 1999, Vol. 94, No. 448, Theory and Methods

02114.
1133

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1134 Journal of the American Statistical Association, December 1999

tention. Denoting the complete data for a subject by C =

ical distribution function stratified across the bins. As in

(Y, VQ, VQ, Q), where VQ denotes time-varying covariates

the authors' estimator, for Q and V of suitably low dimen-

occurring after drop-out Q, VQ denotes those occurring be-

sion, the approach can be completely nonparametric for all

fore drop-out, and Y denotes the primary endpoint of in-

identifiable portions of the model. We outline two exam-

terest occurring at the end of the study, the pattern-mixture

ple to illustrate how linear estimators of the mean may be

model can be defined as

formed.

FC = FylVQ,VQ,QFVQ+vQ,QFv-IQFQ. (1)
Example

1. Suppose that T = 2 and drop-outs can oc-

cur only at T, so that Q = 1 denotes those who miss meaFrom this factorization, it is easy to see that FQ, all remain-

surement 2 and Q = 2 denotes completers. A covariate

is collected at time 1 and the primary endpoint Y is
ing three pieces for completers, and the margins FV- IQVI
for
noncompleters are identifiable. The data contain no information about the remaining portions of the model.

collected at time 2. Assume a linear model for the mean

of Y for completers, E(YIVI, Q = 2) = io + O3V1 and

Various likelihood-based approaches for drawing infer-

that the mean of those who drop out at time 1 differs by

ence from pattern-mixture models have been suggested.

the constant 0 from the completers: E(YI VI, Q = 1) =

Rubin (1977) discussed Bayesian techniques for utilizing

E(YIVI, Q = 2) + 0. Then, by averaging over the appro-

subjective information to relate effects of nonrespondents

priate empirical distributions, the marginal mean of Y is

in sample surveys to those of respondents. Little (1993)
obtained identifying restrictions in simple bivariate normal

calculated as MO = E(Y) = 50 + olVl + 7rq, where

the superscript AC denotes the mean over all available

samples by specifying restrictions corresponding to the pre-

cases and wF is the proportion of subjects with Q = 1.

sumed operational selection model. Hogan and Laird (1997)

An estimate of MO is obtained by substituting estimated re-

handled the lack of identifiability by making specific as-

gression coefficients 3O and i, from the complete cases
and the sample proportion -r of drop-outs. Because /-io is
a function of (i3o, 1, Vl, -k), its variance may be calcu-

sumptions about the relationship of outcome in drop-outs
and completers.

In the likelihood case, an advantage of pattern-mixture

models is that they are not as sensitive to distributional as-

lated from the variance of these estimates using the delta
rule.

sumptions as selection models, where in the latter, estimates
of parameters for the complete data may not be robust to

misspecification of the selection mechanism or model for
the unobservables (Brown 1990; Glynn, Laird, and Rubin
1993; Little 1982, 1985), and estimates of the parameters of

the selection mechanism may be driven almost completely
by the assumed complete-data distribution (Little and Rubin
1987, chap. 11). From the Baker and Laird (1998) model, it

is clear that results in the selection model mechanism can
be equally driven by the assumed model for nonresponse. In
contrast, the model for the nonresponse in mixture models

can be estimated completely from observed data, as can the
model for the complete data, conditional on being a completer. Although (1) is expressed it terms of distributions,

if only the mean of Y is of interest, then the modeling assumptions will be needed only for E(Y VQ, Q). In some
settings it may be more natural to specify a model for this

Example 2. One may generalize the model in Example

1 for the data from ACTG175 by discretizing the drop-

out times at weeks 8, 20, 32, 44, and 56 (completers)
and assuming a linear dependence of Y on covariates for
completers. There are many ways to relate the conditional

means of noncompleters, E(Y Q = t), to that of completers, E(Y Q = T). We suggest using the authors' re-

lationship (16), which compares the means of those who
drop out at time t to those who continue at time t. Alter-

natively, one may compare to those who drop out at time
t + 1, or to the completers directly. In the latter case, it is
sensible to include an interaction with time, because for a

given set of covariates, the means of those who drop out
later in the study should be more similar to the means of
completers than those who drop out earlier.

conditional expectation rather than a model for the nonresponse in terms of the outcome Y. As we illustrate in

the next section, the assumptions necessary to implement

the mixture model are considerably more transparent than
those needed for the selection model, and we find the results
easier to explain and interpret.
3. SIMPLE SEMIPARAMETRIC
PATTERN-MIXTURE MODELS

Based on expression (1), it is easy to derive crude but sim-

ple nonparametric estimators for the identifiable portions

4. SUMMARY

If selection bias is suspect, then the statistician must collaborate with the investigator to form subjective notions

about the nature of the possible selection mechanism. This

article makes a valuable contribution by explicating which
parts of the operational selection model or pattern-mixture

model are estimable from the data and which are not, preventing subjective opinion from imposing hidden biases.
However, being equipped with tools to determine sensitivity to selection bias does not free the investigator from the

of the model and to insert easily interpretable assumptions
need to try to design against nonignorable dropout in new

about the nonidentifiable parts. Without much loss of infor-

studies. Indeed, perhaps the real value in formal hypothet-

mation, FQ may be estimated by grouping drop-out timesical models for dropout lies in their ability to inform pracinto bins, and F-Ic emay be estimated using the empirtitioners of the dangers of selection bias.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Scharfstein,

Rotnitzky,

and

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Baker, S., and Laird, N. M. (1988), "Regression Analysis With Categorical
Data Subject to Nonignorable Nonresponse," Journal of the American

Statistical Association, 88, 62-69.
Brown, C. H. (1990), "Protecting Against Nonrandomly Missing Data in
Longitudinal Studies," Biometrics, 46, 143-157.

Robins:

Rejoinder

1135

Little, R. J. (1982), "Models for Nonresponse in Sample Surveys," Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 77, 237-250.

(1994), "A Class of Pattern-Mixture Models for Normal Incomplete Data," Biometrika, 81, 471-483.

Rubin, D. B. (1974), "Characterizing the Estimation of Parameters in
Incomplete-Data Problems," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 69, 467-474.

Glynn, R. J., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. (1993), "Multiple Imputation

(1977), "Formalizing Subjective Notions About the Effect of Non-

in Mixture Models for Nonignorable Nonresponse With Follow-ups,"

respondents in Sample Surveys," Journal of the American Statistical

Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88, 984-993.

Association, 72, 538-543.

Rejoinder
Daniel 0. SCHARFSTEIN, Andrea ROTNITZKY, and James M. ROBINS

1. INTRODUCTION

We thank the editor for organizing this discussion and the

discussants for their stimulating comments. In their discus-

sion, Fan and Zhang (FZ) elegantly point out the daunting
uncertainties that exist when there is substantial drop-out
and suggest that possibly "one should not adjust at all for

drop-out bias if no reliable method is available for modeling the drop-out time." Although sympathetic with this
viewpoint, we would not wish to discard costly and potentially important data without first taking a careful look. So

mists," then sensitivity analysis may serve as an important
corrective.

If the only reason for censoring is loss to follow-up

(rather than death or departure from the treatment protocol), then there is a reliable (albeit expensive) way to validly

correct for selection bias. Specifically, just after the time at
which the outcome of interest is to be measured, an extensive effort can be made to find and measure the outcome on
a random sample of the drop-outs. We discuss this approach
further in Section 3.4.

what, if anything, can be done? For failure time outcomes
or outcomes with a bounded range (e.g., dichotomous out-

comes), the comparison of worst-case bounds is an obvious
first step. If these are too wide to be useful, then a nearly
nonparametric sensitivity analysis can help the investigators
examine the stability of their conclusions under varying as-

sumptions. As David Freedman concludes, "when substantial amounts of data are missing, the only analysis that matters is often a sensitivity analysis." Because the nonignorable selection bias function is at best only weakly identified,
subjective input from subject matter experts is needed. Van
der Laan fears that the task we have set for these experts

is undoable and proposes a different, but related approach.
Diggle endorses our approach for estimating simple functionals such as the mean, but suggests a more parametric
approach when estimating complex functionals.

Laird and Pauler (LP) suggest an alternative approach

2. RESPONSE TO DISCUSSANTS
2.1 Freedman

Freedman considers the discrete time, single-occasion

version of our nonparametric selection model (1). He provides an elegant, rigorous derivation and explicit characterization of the map that takes the law of the observed

data and the nonidentified selection bias parameter to the
unique law of the full data. In Section 5 of a related work,
Robins et al. (1999), and Appendix A of our article, we
provide less elegant derivations of this map in the discrete
time multiple-occasion and continuous-time versions of the
model.
2.2 Fan and Zhang

FZ are concerned that our selection model may be re-

strictive because it assumes a proportional hazards model
for dropout. But this concern is unnecessary, because the

based on fitting regressions to several "pattern-mixture"

general form (13) of our model includes all nonresponse

model variants. Little and Rubin (LR) agree that in some

mechanisms for some choice of the selection function r in

cases a sensitivity analysis is important, but propose fit-

(13). However, FZ make the further point, with which we

ting fully parametric models. They argue that the greater

agree and address further in Section 2.5.4, that it is difficult

efficiency outweighs the associated potential for bias. LR

to choose among the possible selection functions, because

even suggest that the sampling variability from a single

the data offer no guidance; the selection function repre-

parametric model might often suffice as a measure of un-

sents selection bias due to unmeasured factors and thus is

certainty. We do not agree with LR's view that the user's

not identified, unless we were to impose further, possibly

desire for "simplicity and concision" helps justify such a

incorrect, a priori restrictions such as (2). FZ hone in on

limited inference. Our goal is to help scientists interpret

this key point when they inquire about the possibility of

the evidence in their data. By ignoring model uncertainty,
we do a disservice to them, to the statistical profession,

? 1999 American Statistical Association

and to the science. If Diggle is correct in his opinion

Journal of the American Statistical Association

(which we share) that scientists are "inveterate overopti-

December 1999, Vol. 94, No. 448, Theory and Methods

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

