Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 24, Number 2—Spring 2010—Pages 31–46

Tantalus on the Road to Asymptopia

Edward E. Leamer

M

y first reaction to “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics,”
authored by Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, was: Wow! This
paper makes a stunningly good case for relying on purposefully randomized or accidentally randomized experiments to relieve the doubts that afflict
inferences from nonexperimental data. On further reflection, I realized that I may
have been overcome with irrational exuberance. Moreover, with this great honor
bestowed on my “con” article, I couldn’t easily throw this child of mine overboard.
We economists trudge relentlessly toward Asymptopia, where data are unlimited
and estimates are consistent, where the laws of large numbers apply perfectly and
where the full intricacies of the economy are completely revealed. But it’s a frustrating journey, since, no matter how far we travel, Asymptopia remains infinitely far
away. Worst of all, when we feel pumped up with our progress, a tectonic shift can
occur, like the Panic of 2008, making it seem as though our long journey has left us
disappointingly close to the State of Complete Ignorance whence we began.
The pointlessness of much of our daily activity makes us receptive when the
Priests of our tribe ring the bells and announce a shortened path to Asymptopia.
(Remember the Cowles Foundation offering asymptotic properties of simultaneous
equations estimates and structural parameters?) We may listen, but we don’t hear,
when the Priests warn that the new direction is only for those with Faith, those
with complete belief in the Assumptions of the Path. It often takes years down the
Path, but sooner or later, someone articulates the concerns that gnaw away in each of

Edward E. Leamer is Professor of Economics, Management and Statistics, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. His e-mail address is 〈edward.leamer@
anderson.ucla.edu〉〉.
anderson.ucla.edu
■

doi=10.1257/jep.24.2.31

32

Journal of Economic Perspectives

us and asks if the Assumptions are valid. (T. C. Liu (1960) and Christopher Sims
(1980) were the ones who proclaimed that the Cowles Emperor had no clothes.)
Small seeds of doubt in each of us inevitably turn to despair and we abandon that
direction and seek another.
Two of the latest products-to-end-all-suffering are nonparametric estimation
and consistent standard errors, which promise results without assumptions, as if
we were already in Asymptopia where data are so plentiful that no assumptions
are needed. But like procedures that rely explicitly on assumptions, these new
methods work well in the circumstances in which explicit or hidden assumptions
hold tolerably well and poorly otherwise. By disguising the assumptions on which
nonparametric methods and consistent standard errors rely, the purveyors of these
methods have made it impossible to have an intelligible conversation about the
circumstances in which their gimmicks do not work well and ought not to be used.
As for me, I prefer to carry parameters on my journey so I know where I am and
where I am going, not travel stoned on the latest euphoria drug.
This is a story of Tantalus, grasping for knowledge that remains always beyond
reach. In Greek mythology Tantalus was favored among all mortals by being asked
to dine with the gods. But he misbehaved—some say by trying to take divine food
back to the mortals, some say by inviting the gods to a dinner for which Tantalus
boiled his son and served him as the main dish. Whatever the etiquette faux pas,
Tantalus was punished by being immersed up to his neck in water. When he bowed
his head to drink, the water drained away, and when he stretched up to eat the fruit
hanging above him, wind would blow it out of reach. It would be much healthier
for all of us if we could accept our fate, recognize that perfect knowledge will be
forever beyond our reach and find happiness with what we have. If we stopped
grasping for the apple of Asymptopia, we would discover that our pool of Tantalus
is full of small but enjoyable insights and wisdom.
Can we economists agree that it is extremely hard work to squeeze truths
from our data sets and what we genuinely understand will remain uncomfortably limited? We need words in our methodological vocabulary to express the
limits. We need sensitivity analyses to make those limits transparent. Those who
think otherwise should be required to wear a scarlet-letter O around their necks,
for “overconfidence.” Angrist and Pischke obviously know this. Their paper is
peppered with concerns about quasi-experiments and with criticisms of instrumental variables thoughtlessly chosen. I think we would make progress if we
stopped using the words “instrumental variables” and used instead “surrogates”—
meaning surrogates for the experiment that we wish we could have conducted.
The psychological power of the vocabulary requires a “surrogate” to be chosen
with much greater care than an “instrument.”
As Angrist and Pischke persuasively argue, either purposefully randomized
experiments or accidentally randomized “natural” experiments can be extremely
helpful, but Angrist and Pischke seem to me to overstate the potential benefits
of the approach. Since hard and inconclusive thought is needed to transfer the

Edward E. Leamer

33

results learned from randomized experiments into other domains, there must
therefore remain uncertainty and ambiguity about the breadth of application
of any findings from randomized experiments. For example, how does Card’s
(1990) study of the effect on the Miami labor market of the Mariel boatlift of
125,000 Cuban refugees in 1980 inform us of the effects of a 2000 mile wall along
the southern border of the United States? Thoughts are also needed to justify the
choice of instrumental variables, and a critical element of doubt and ambiguity
necessarily afflicts any instrumental variables estimate. (You and I know that
truly consistent estimators are imagined, not real.) Angrist and Pischke understand this. But their students and their students’ students may come to think
that it is enough to wave a clove of garlic and chant “randomization” to solve all
our problems just as an earlier cohort of econometricians have acted as if it were
enough to chant “instrumental variable.”
I will begin this comment with some thoughts about the inevitable limits of
randomization, and the need for sensitivity analysis in this area, as in all areas
of applied empirical work. To be provocative, I will argue here that the financial
catastrophe that we have just experienced powerfully illustrates a reason why
extrapolating from natural experiments will inevitably be hazardous. The misinterpretation of historical data that led rating agencies, investors, and even myself to
guess that home prices would decline very little and default rates would be tolerable
even in a severe recession should serve as a caution for all applied econometrics. I
will also offer some thoughts about how the difficulties of applied econometric work
cannot be evaded with econometric innovations, offering some under-recognized
difficulties with instrumental variables and robust standard errors as examples. I
conclude with some comments about the shortcomings of an experimentalist paradigm as applied to macroeconomics, and with some warnings about the willingness
of applied economists to apply push-button methodologies without sufficient hard
thought regarding their applicability and shortcomings.

Randomization Is Not Enough
Angrist and Pischke offer a compelling argument that randomization is one
large step in the right direction. Which it is! But like all the other large steps we
have already taken, this one doesn’t get us where we want to be.
In addition to randomized treatments, most scientific experiments also have
controls over the important confounding effects. These controls are needed to
improve the accuracy of the estimate of the treatment effect and also to determine
clearly the range of circumstances over which the estimate applies. (In a laboratory
vacuum, we would find that a feather falls as fast as a bowling ball. In the real world
with air, wind, and humidity, all bets are off, pending further study.)
In place of experimental controls, economists can, should, and usually
do include control variables in their estimated equations, whether the data are

34

Journal of Economic Perspectives

nonexperimental or experimental. To make my point about the effect of these
controls it will be helpful to refer to the prototypical model:
yt = α + (β 0 + β1′ zt ) xt + θ ′ wt + εt ,
where x is the treatment, y the response, z is a set of interactive confounders, w is a
set of additive confounders, where ε stands for all the other unnamed, unmeasured
effects which we sheepishly assume behaves like a random variable, distributed
independently of the observables. Here ( β 0 + β1′ zt ) is the variable treatment effect
that we wish to estimate. One set of problems is caused by the additive confounding
variables w, which can be uncomfortably numerous. Another set of problems is
caused by the interactive confounding variables z, which may include features of
the experimental design as well as characteristics of the subjects.
Consider first the problem of the additive confounders. We have been taught
that experimental randomization of the treatment eliminates the requirement
to include additive controls in the equation because the correlation between the
controls and the treatment is zero by design and regression estimates with or
without the controls are unbiased, indeed identical. That’s true in Asymptopia,
but it’s not true here in the Land of the Finite Sample where correlation is an everpresent fact of life and where issues of sensitivity of conclusions to assumptions can
arise even with randomized treatments if the correlations between the randomized
treatment and the additive confounders, by chance, are high enough.
Indeed, if the number of additive confounding variables is equal to or larger
than the number of observations, any treatment x,, randomized or not, will be
perfectly collinear with the confounding variables (the undersized sample problem).
Then, to estimate the treatment effect, we would need to make judgments about
which of the confounding variables to exclude. That would ordinarily require a sensitivity analysis, unless through Divine revelation economists were told exactly which
controls to include and which to exclude. Though the number of randomized trials
may be large, an important sensitivity question can still arise because the number
of confounding variables can be increased without limit by using lagged values and
nonlinear forms. In other words, if you cannot commit to some notion of smoothness
of the functional form of the confounders and some notion of limited or smooth
time delays in response, you will not be able to estimate the treatment effect even
with a randomized experiment, unless experimental controls keep the confounding
variables constant or Divine inspiration allows you to omit some of the variables.
You are free to dismiss the preceding paragraph as making a mountain out
of a molehill. By reducing the realized correlation between the treatment and
the controls, randomization allows a larger set of additive control variables to
be included before we confront the sensitivity issues caused by collinearity. For
that reason, though correlation between the treatment and the confounders with
nonexperimental data is a huge problem, it is much less important when the treatment is randomized. With that problem neutralized, concern shifts elsewhere.

Tantalus on the Road to Asymptopia

35

The big problem with randomized experiments is not additive confounders;
it’s the interactive confounders. This is the heterogeneity issue that especially
concerns Heckman (1992) and Deaton (2008) who emphasized the need to study
“causal mechanisms,” which I am summarizing in terms of the interactive z
variables. Angrist and Pischke completely understand this point, but they seem
inappropriately dismissive when they accurately explain “extrapolation of causal
effects to new settings is always speculative,” which is true, but the extrapolation
speculation is more transparent and more worrisome in the experimental case
than in the nonexperimental case.
After all, in nonexperimental nonrandomized settings, when judicious
choice of additive confounders allows one to obtain just about any estimate of
the treatment effect, there is little reason to worry about “extrapolation of causal
effects to new settings.” What’s to extrapolate anyway? Our lack of knowledge?
Greater concern about extrapolation is thus an indicator of the progress that
comes from randomization.
When the randomization is accidental, we may pretend that the instrumental
variables estimator is consistent, but we all know that the assumptions that justify
that conclusion cannot possibly hold exactly. Those who use instrumental variables
would do well to anticipate the inevitable barrage of questions about the appropriateness of their instruments. Ever-present asymptotic bias casts a large dark shadow on
instrumental variables estimates and is what limits the applicability of the estimate
even to the setting that is observed, not to mention extrapolation to new settings. In
addition, small sample bias of instrumental variables estimators, even in the consistent case, is a huge neglected problem with practice, made worse by the existence of
multiple weak instruments. This seems to be one of the points of the Angrist and
Pischke paper—purposeful randomization is better than accidental randomization.
But when the randomization is purposeful, a whole new set of issues arises—
experimental contamination—which is much more serious with human subjects
in a social system than with chemicals mixed in beakers or parts assembled into
mechanical structures. Anyone who designs an experiment in economics would do
well to anticipate the inevitable barrage of questions regarding the valid transference
of things learned in the lab (one value of z)) into the real world (a different value of z).
).
With interactive confounders explicitly included, the overall treatment effect
β 0 + β′ zt is not a number but a variable that depends on the confounding effects.
Absent observation of the interactive compounding effects z,, what is estimated is
some kind of average treatment effect which is called by Imbens and Angrist (1994)
a “Local Average Treatment Effect,” which is a little like the lawyer who explained
that when he was a young man he lost many cases he should have won but as he
grew older he won many that he should have lost, so that on the average justice was
done. In other words, if you act as if the treatment effect is a random variable by
substituting βt for β 0 + β′ zt , the notation inappropriately relieves you of the heavy
burden of considering what are the interactive confounders and finding some way
to measure them. Less elliptically, absent observation of z,, the estimated treatment

36

Journal of Economic Perspectives

effect should be transferred only into those settings in which the confounding
interactive variables have values close to the mean values in the experiment. If little
thought has gone into identifying these possible confounders, it seems probable
that little thought will be given to the limited applicability of the results in other
settings. This is the error made by the bond rating agencies in the recent financial
crash—they transferred findings from one historical experience to a domain in
which they no longer applied because, I will suggest, social confounders were not
included. More on this below.

Sensitivity Analysis and Sensitivity Conversations are What We Need
I thus stand by the view in my 1983 essay that econometric theory promises
more than it can deliver, because it requires a complete commitment to assumptions that are actually only half-heartedly maintained. The only way to create
credible inferences with doubtful assumptions is to perform a sensitivity analysis
that separates the fragile inferences from the sturdy ones: those that depend
substantially on the doubtful assumptions and those that do not. Since I wrote
my “con in econometrics” challenge much progress has been made in economic
theory and in econometric theory and in experimental design, but there has
been little progress technically or procedurally on this subject of sensitivity analyses in econometrics. Most authors still support their conclusions with the results
implied by several models, and they leave the rest of us wondering how hard they
had to work to find their favorite outcomes and how sure we have to be about
the instrumental variables assumptions with accidentally randomized treatments
and about the extent of the experimental bias with purposefully randomized
treatments. It’s like a court of law in which we hear only the experts on the plaintiff’s side, but are wise enough to know that there are abundant arguments for
the defense.
I have been making this point in the econometrics sphere since before I wrote
Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data in 1978.1 That book
was stimulated by my observation of economists at work who routinely pass their
data through the filters of many models and then choose a few results for reporting
purposes. The range of models economists are willing to explore creates ambiguity in the inferences that can properly be drawn from our data, and I have been
recommending mathematical methods of sensitivity analysis that are intended to
determine the limits of that ambiguity.

1

Parenthetically, if you are alert, you might have been unsettled by the use of the word “with” in my
title: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data, since inferences are made with tools but from data. That is
my very subtle way of suggesting that knowledge is created by an interactive exploratory process, quite
unlike the preprogrammed estimation dictated by traditional econometric theory.

Edward E. Leamer

37

The language that I used to make the case for sensitivity analysis seems not to
have penetrated the consciousness of economists. What I called “extreme bounds
analysis” in my 1983 essay is a simple example that is the best-known approach,
though poorly understood and inappropriately applied. Extreme bounds analysis
is not an “ad hoc but intuitive approach,” as described by Angrist and Pischke.
It is a solution to a clearly and precisely defined sensitivity question, which is to
determine the range of estimates that the data could support given a precisely
defined range of assumptions about the prior distribution. It’s a correspondence
between the assumption space and the estimation space. Incidentally, if you could
see the wisdom in finding the range of estimates that the data allow, I would work
to provide tools that identify the range of t-values,
-values, a more important measure of
the fragility of the inferences.
A prior distribution is a foreign concept for most economists, and I tried to
create a bridge between the logic of the analysis and its application by expressing
the bounds in language that most economists could understand. Here it is:
Include in the equation the treatment variable and a single linear combination of the additive controls. Then fi nd the linear combination of controls that
provides the greatest estimated treatment effect and the linear combination that
provides the smallest estimated treatment effect. That corresponds to the range
of estimates that can be obtained when it is known that the controls are doubtful
(zero being the most likely estimate, a priori) but there is complete ambiguity
about the probable importance of the variables, arbitrary scales, and arbitrary
coordinate systems. What is ad hoc are the follow-on methods, for example,
computing the standard errors of the bounds or reporting a distribution of estimates as in Sala-i-Martin (1997).
A culture that insists on statistically significant estimates is not naturally
receptive to another reason our data are uninformative (too much dependence on
arbitrary assumptions). One reason these methods are rarely used is their honesty
seems destructive; or, to put it another way, a fanatical commitment to fanciful
formal models is often needed to create the appearance of progress. But we need
to change the culture and regard the finding of “no persuasive evidence in these
data” on the same footing as a “statistically significant and sturdy estimate.” Keep
in mind that the sensitivity correspondence between assumptions and inferences
can go in either direction. We can ask what set of inferences corresponds to a
particular set of assumptions, but we can also ask what assumptions are needed
to support a hoped-for inference. That is exactly what an economic theorem does.
The intellectual value of the Factor Price Equalization Theorem does not derive
from its truthfulness; it’s value comes from the fact that it provides a minimal set of
assumptions that imply Factor Price Equalization, thus focusing attention on why
factor prices are not equalized.
To those of you who do data analysis, I thus pose two questions that I think
every empirical enterprise should be able to answer: What feature of the data leads
to that conclusion? What set of assumptions is essential to support that inference?

38

Journal of Economic Perspectives

The Troubles on Wall Street and Three-Valued Logic
With the ashes of the mathematical models used to rate mortgage-backed
securities still smoldering on Wall Street, now is an ideal time to revisit the sensitivity issues. Justin Fox (2009) suggests in his title The Myth of the Rational Market,
A History of Risk, Reward, and Delusion on Wall Street that we have been making a
modeling error and that the problems lie in the assumption of rational actors,
which presumably can be remedied by business-as-usual after adding a “behavioral” variable or two into the model. I think the roots of the problem are deeper,
calling for a change in the way we do business and calling for a book that might
be titled: The Myth of the Data Generating Process: A History of Delusion in Academia..
Rationality of financial markets is a pretty straightforward consequence of the
assumption that financial returns are drawn from a “data generating process”
whose properties are apparent to experienced investors and econometricians,
after studying the historical data. If we don’t know the data generating process,
then the efficient markets edifice falls apart. Even simple-minded fi nance ideas,
like the benefits from diversification, become suspect if we cannot reliably assess
predictive means, variances, and covariances.
But it isn’t just finance that rests on this myth of a data-generating process.
It is the whole edifice of empirical economics. Let’s face it. The evolving, innovating, self-organizing, self-healing human system we call the economy is not well
described by a fictional “data-generating process.” The point of the sensitivity
analyses that I have been advocating begins with the admission that the historical
data are compatible with countless alternative data-generating models. If there is
one, the best we can do is to get close; we are never going to know it.
Confronted with our collective colossal failure to anticipate the problems
with mortgage-backed securities, we economists have been stampeding shamelessly back to Keynesian thinking about macroeconomics, scurrying to reread
Keynes’ (1936) General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.. We would do well
to go back a little further in time to 1921 when both Keynes’ Treatise on Probability
and Frank Knight’s Risk, Uncertainty and Profit were published. Both of these
books are about the myth of the data generating process. Both deal with the
limits of the expected utility maximization paradigm. Both serve as foundations
for the arguments in favor of sensitivity analysis in my “con” paper. Both are about
“three-valued logic.”
Here is how three-valued logic works. Suppose you can confidently determine
that it is a good idea to bring your umbrella if the chance of rain is 10 percent or
higher, but carrying the umbrella involves more cost than expected benefit if the
chance of rain is less. When the data point clearly to a probability either in excess of
10 percent or less than 10 percent, then we are in a world of Knightian risk in which
the decision can be based on expected utility maximization. But suppose there is
one model that suggests the probability is 15 percent while another equally good
model suggests the probability is 5 percent. Then we are in a world of Knightian

Tantalus on the Road to Asymptopia

39

uncertainty in which expected utility maximization doesn’t produce a decision.
When any number between 0.05 and 0.15 is an equally good2 assessment of the
chance of rain we are dealing with epistemic probabilities that are not numbers but
intervals, in the spirit of Keynes (1921). While the decision is two-valued—you either
take your umbrella or you don’t—the state of mind is three-valued: yes (take the
umbrella), no (leave it behind), or I don’t know. The point of adopting three-valued
logic like Keynes and Knight is to encourage us to think clearly about the limits of
our knowledge and the limits of the expected utility maximization paradigm. With
all of the focus on decision making with two-valued logic, the profession has done
precious little work on decision under ambiguity and three-valued logic.3
In other words, when I asked us to “take the con out of econometrics” I
was only saying the obvious: If the range of inferences that can reasonably be
supported by the data we have is too wide to point to one and only one decision, we need to admit that the data leave us confused. Thus my contribution to
econometrics has been confusion! You, though, refuse to admit that you are just
as confused as I.
Three-valued logic seems especially pertinent when extending the results of
experiments into other domains—there is a lot of “we don’t know” there. Even in
the case of mechanical systems, with statistical properties much better understood
than economics/financial human systems, it is not assumed that models will work
under extreme conditions. Engineers may design aircraft that according to their
computer models can fly, but until real airplanes are actually tested in normal
and stressful conditions, the aircraft are not certified to carry passengers. Indeed,
Boeing’s composite plastic 787 Dreamliner has been suffering production delays
because wing damage has shown up “when the stress on the wings was well below
the load the wings must bear to be federally certified to carry passengers” (Gates,
2009). Too bad we couldn’t have stress-tested those mortgage-backed securities
before we started flying around the world with them. Too bad the rating agencies did not use three-valued logic with another bond rating: “AAA-H,” meaning
hypothetically AAA according to a model but not yet certified as recession-proof.
There is of course more than one reason why mortgage-backed securities
didn’t fly when the weather got rough, but it will suit my purposes here if I make
the argument that it was an inappropriate extrapolation of data from one accidental experiment to a different setting that is at the root of the problem. To make
this argument, it is enough to look at the data in Los Angeles. Don’t expect a full
econometric housing model. It’s only a provocative illustration.
Figure 1 contrasts nonfarm payrolls in Los Angeles and in the United States
overall during the last three recessions. In 2001 and in 2008, the L.A. job market

2

Please don’t think I am assigning a uniform distribution over this interval, since if that were the case,
the probability would be precisely equal to the mean: 0.10.
3
Bewley (1986), Klibanoff, Marinacci, and Mukerji (2005), and Hanany and Klibanoff (2009) and
references therein are exceptions.

40

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Percent change in jobs (relative to Jan. 1990)

Figure 1
Payroll Jobs in Los Angeles and U.S. Overall
(recessions shaded)
28
24
20
16
12
U.S. overall

8
4
0

Los Angeles

−4
−8

Dec. 1993 trough

−12
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Note: The figure shows the change in number of employees on nonfarm payrolls, in the Los Angeles
area and in the U.S. overall, relative to January 1990, seasonally adjusted. The Los Angeles area is the
Los Angeles–Long Beach–Santa Ana, California, Metropolitan Statistical Area.

declined in parallel with the U.S. decline, but the recession of 1990–91 was especially severe in Los Angeles. U.S. payroll jobs dropped by 1.5 percent during this
recession, while jobs in the Los Angeles metropolitan statistical area declined by
11 percent and did not return to their 1990 levels until 1999. This was a natural
experiment known as the end of the Cold War, with Los Angeles treated and with,
for example, San Francisco in the control group. (The 2001 recession had the treatment reversed, with San Francisco treated to a tech bust but Los Angeles in the
control group.)
Thus, I suggest, the L.A. data in the early 1990s is a test case of the effect of
a severe recession on mortgage defaults. Figure 2 illustrates the number of homes
sold and the median prices in Los Angeles from January 1985 to August 2009. The
horizontal line segments indicate the period over which all homes purchased with
a loan to value ratio of 90 percent (indicating a 10 percent downpayment) and
interest-only payments will be underwater at the next trough. If all these homes
were returned to the banks under the worst case scenario when the price hits
bottom, the bank losses are 90 percent of the gap between that line segment and
the price at origination. Clearly the underwater problem is much more intense in
the latest downturn than it was in the 1990s.
In the first episode, volume peaked much before prices, falling by 50 percent
in 28 months. Though volume was crashing, the median price continued to
increase, peaking in May 1991, 101 percent above its value at the start of these
data in January 1985. Then commenced a slow price decline with a trough in

Edward E. Leamer

41

Figure 2
Los Angeles Housing Market: Median Home Price and Sales Volume
700,000

Median price
(right axis)

6,000

300,000
200,000

5,000
4,000
Sales volume
(left axis)

3,000

100,000

Median price ($)

Sales volume

500,000
400,000

2,000
09
20 8
0
20 7
0
20 6
0
20 5
0
20
04
20 3
0
20 2
0
20 1
00

2 0
0
20 9
9
19 8
9
19 7
99

1 6
9
19 5
9
19 4
9
19 3
99

1 2
9
19 1
9
19 0
99

19

1
88
19 9
8

87
19 6
8
19 5
8

19

Line segments identify underwater homes at cycle troughs assuming 90% loan to value
Source: California Association of Realtors.
Note: The median price and sales volume are a 3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted. The line
segments indentify homes that will be underwater at the coming cycle trough assuming 90 percent
loan to value at origination and interest only payments. (Denoting the price at time t by pt and the price
at the trough by p min, with 10 percent down, the loan balance is 0.9 pt , and the home is underwater at
the trough if 0.9 pt > p min or if pt > p min /0.9.)

December 1996, with the median price 29 percent below its previous peak, a
decline of 5 percent per year.
I have been fond of summarizing these data by saying that for homes, it’s
a volume cycle, not a price cycle. This very slow price-discovery occurs because
people celebrate investment gains, but deny losses. Owner-occupants of homes
can likewise hold onto long-ago valuations and insist on prices that the market
cannot support. Because of that denial, there are many fewer transactions, and
the transactions that do occur tend to be at the seller’s prices, not equilibrium
market prices.
The slow price discovery acts like a time-out, allowing the fundamentals to
catch up to valuations and keeping foreclosure rates at minimal levels.4 In the
early phase of the current housing correction, history seemed to be repeating
itself, since volume was dropping rapidly even as prices continued to rise. But then
began a rapid 51 percent drop in home prices between August 2007 to March 2009,
creating a huge amount of underwater valuation.
4
The first underwater problem illustrated in Figure 2 could be almost completely remedied by a switch
from 90 to 80 percent loan-to-value ratios starting when volumes began to drop, because most of the
underwater loans came after that break in the market.

42

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 3
Southern California Foreclosures
20,000
18,000

Inland Empire
Los Angeles

16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Source: MDA DataQuick.
Note: The concentration of foreclosures in time and space in Southern California in the latest housing
correction is illustrated in Figure 3, which displays quarterly foreclosures since 1987 for both Los
Angeles County and “The Inland Empire,” composed of the two “peripheral” counties east of Los
Angeles County (Riverside and San Bernadino), where subprime lending was very prevalent. In both
Los Angeles and the Inland Empire in the 1990s, the rise in foreclosures trailed the price movement
by several years. In contrast, the time-concentrated spike in foreclosures in 2007 occurred at the very
start of the price erosion and has been much more extreme in the Inland Empire than in Los Angeles.

Why did the L.A. 1990s data mislead with regard to the current housing
correction? One possible answer is untested social effects and unmeasured subject
effects—two very important interactive confounders. Innovations in mortgage
origination in 2003–2005 extended the home-ownership peripheries of our cities
both in terms of income and location. When the subprime mortgage window shut
down, the demand for owner-occupied homes at the extended peripheries was
eliminated virtually overnight. Since these properties were financed with loans
that could only work if the houses paid for themselves via appreciation, the banks
became the new owners. Accounting rules do not allow banks to deny losses the way
owner-occupants do, and banks immediately dumped the foreclosed homes onto
the market at the worst time, in the worst way, with broken windows and burned-up
lawns, concentrated in time and space, causing very rapid (or even exaggerated)
price discovery in the affected peripheries. In contrast, foreclosures in the 1990s,
illustrated in Figure 3 for the case of Southern California, were delayed, and were
dispersed in time and space.
We all need to learn both narrower and broader lessons here. I expected price
discovery in housing markets to be slow, as it had been after the bursting of previous
bubbles, and I was completely wrong. I will be more careful about interactive social
confounders in the future.

Tantalus on the Road to Asymptopia

43

White-Washing
It should not be a surprise at this point in this essay that I part ways with
Angrist and Pischke in their apparent endorsement of White’s (1980) paper on how
to calculate robust standard errors. Angrist and Pischke write: “Robust standard
errors, automated clustering, and larger samples have also taken the steam out
of issues like heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. A legacy of White’s (1980)
paper on robust standard errors, one of the most highly cited from the period, is
the near-death of generalized least squares in cross-sectional applied work.”
An earlier generation of econometricians corrected the heteroskedasticity
problems with weighted least squares using weights suggested by an explicit heteroskedasticity model. These earlier econometricians understood that reweighting the
observations can have dramatic effects on the actual estimates, but they treated
the effect on the standard errors as a secondary matter. A “robust standard” error
completely turns this around, leaving the estimates the same but changing the
size of the confidence interval. Why should one worry about the length of the
confidence interval, but not the location? This mistaken advice relies on asymptotic properties of estimators.5 I call it “White-washing.” Best to remember that
no matter how far we travel, we remain always in the Land of the Finite Sample,
infinitely far from Asymptopia. Rather than mathematical musings about life in
Asymptopia, we should be doing the hard work of modeling the heteroskedasticity
and the time dependence to determine if sensible reweighting of the observations
materially changes the locations of the estimates of interest as well as the widths of
the confidence intervals.
Estimation with instrumental variables is another case of inappropriate reliance on asymptotic properties. In finite samples, these estimators can seriously
_ _
distort the evidence for the same reason that the ratio of two sample means, y /x , is
a poor summary of the data evidence about the ratio of the means, E(y)/E(
E( )/E(x),
), when
_
the finite sample leaves a “dividing-by-zero-problem” because the denominator x
is not statistically far from zero. This problem is greatly amplified with multiple
weak instruments, a situation that is quite common. It is actually quite feasible
from a Bayesian perspective to program an alert into our instrumental variables
estimation together with remedies, though this depends on Assumptions. In other
words, you have to do some hard thinking to use instrumental variables methods
in finite samples.
As the sample size grows, concern should shift from small-sample bias to
asymptotic bias caused by the failure of the assumptions needed to make instrumental variables work. Since it is the unnamed, unobserved variables that are the
source of the problem, this isn’t easy to think about. The percentage bias is small if

5

The change in length but not location of a confidence interval is appropriate for one specialized
covariance structure.

44

Journal of Economic Perspectives

the variables you have forgotten are unimportant compared with the variables that
you have remembered. That’s easy to determine, right?

A Word on Macroeconomics
Finally, I think that Angrist and Pischke are way too optimistic about the
prospects for an experimental approach to macroeconomics. Our understanding
of causal effects in macroeconomics is virtually nil, and will remain so. Don’t we
know that? Though many members of our profession have jumped up to support
the $787 billion stimulus program in 2009 as if they knew that was an appropriate
response to the Panic of 2008, the intellectual basis for that opinion is very thin,
especially if you take a close look at how that stimulus bill was written.
The economists who coined the DSGE acronym combined in three terms the
things economists least understand: “dynamic,” standing for forward-looking decision making; “stochastic,” standing for decisions under uncertainty and ambiguity;
and “general equilibrium,” standing for the social process that coordinates and
influences the actions of all the players. I have tried to make this point in the title
of my recent book: Macroeconomic Patterns and Stories (Leamer, 2009). That’s what we
do. We seek patterns and tell stories.

Conclusion
Ignorance is a formidable foe, and to have hope of even modest victories, we
economists need to use every resource and every weapon we can muster, including
thought experiments (theory), and the analysis of data from nonexperiments,
accidental experiments, and designed experiments. We should be celebrating the
small genuine victories of the economists who use their tools most effectively, and
we should dial back our adoration of those who can carry the biggest and brightest
and least-understood weapons. We would benefit from some serious humility, and
from burning our “Mission Accomplished” banners. It’s never gonna happen.
Part of the problem is that we data analysts want it all automated. We want an
answer at the push of a button on a keyboard. We know intellectually that thoughtless choice of an instrument can be a severe problem and that summarizing the
data with the “consistent” instrumental variables estimate when the instruments
are weak is an equally large error.6 The substantial literature on estimation with
weak instruments has not yet produced a serious practical competitor to the usual
6

Bayesians have a straightforward solution in theory to this problem: describe the marginal likelihood
function, marginalized with respect to all the parameters except the coefficient being estimated. If
the instruments are strong, this marginal likelihood will have its mode near the instrumental variables estimate. If the instruments are weak, the central tendency of the marginal likelihood will lie
elsewhere, sometimes near the ordinary least-squares estimate.

Edward E. Leamer

45

instrumental variables estimator. Our keyboards now come with a highly seductive button for instrumental variables estimates. To decide how best to adjust the
instrumental variables estimates for small-sample distortions requires some hard
thought. To decide how much asymptotic bias afflicts our so-called consistent estimates requires some very hard thought and dozens of alternative buttons. Faced
with the choice between thinking long and hard versus pushing the instrumental
variables button, the single button is winning by a very large margin.
Let’s not add a “randomization” button to our intellectual keyboards, to be
pushed without hard reflection and thought.
■ Comments

from Angus Deaton, James Heckman, Guido Imbens, and the editors and referees
for the JEP (Timothy Taylor, James Hines, David Autor, and Chad Jones) are gratefully
acknowledged, but all errors of fact and opinion, of course, remain my own.

References
Bewley, Truman F. 1986. “Knightian Decision Theory.” Parts 1 and 2. Cowles Foundation
Discussion Papers No. 807 and 835.
Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel
Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 43(2): 245–57.
Chamberlain, Gary, and Guido Imbens.
1996. “Hierarchical Bayes Models with Many
Instrumental Variables.” NBER Technical
Working Paper 204.
The Economist. 2009. “Cause and Defect.”
August 13, 2009.
Deaton, Angus. 2008. “Instruments of Development: Randomization in the Tropics, and the
Search for the Elusive Keys to Economic Development.” The Keynes Lecture, British Academy,
October, 2008.
Fox, Justin. 2009. The Myth of the Rational
Market. A History of Risk, Reward and Delusion on
Wall Street. New York: HarperCollins.
Gates, Dominic. 2009. “Boeing 787 Wing
Flaw Extends Inside Plane.” Seattle Times, July
30.
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html
/boeingaerospace/2009565319_boeing30.html.
Hanany, Eran, and Peter Klibanoff. 2009.
“Updating Ambiguity Averse Preferences.” The
B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics, vol. 9, issue 1
(Advances), article 37.

Heckman, James J. 1992. “Randomization
and Social Program Evaluation.” In Evaluating
Welfare and Training Programs, eds. Charles Manski
and Irwin Garfinkel, 201–230. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. (Also available as NBER
Technical Working Paper 107.)
Imbens, Guido W. 2009. “Better LATE than
Nothing: Some Comments on Deaton (2009) and
Heckman and Urzua (2009).” NBER Working
Paper No. w14896.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist.
1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local
Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica, 62(2):
467–75.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1921. A Treatise on
Probability. London: Macmillan.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General
Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan.
Klibanoff, Peter, Massimo Marinacci, and
Sujoy Mukerji. 2005. “A Smooth Model of Decision Making Under Ambiguity.” Econometrica,
73(6): 1849–1892.
Knight, Frank. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and
Profit. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Leamer, Edward E. 1978. Specification Searches:
Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data. John
Wiley and Sons.
Leamer, Edward E. 1983. “Let’s Take the Con

46

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Out of Econometrics.” American Economic Review,
73(1): 31–43.
Leamer, Edward E. 1985. “Vector Autoregressions for Causal Inference?” In Karl Brunner and
Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, vol. 22, pp. 255–304.
Leamer, Edward E. 2009. Macroeconomic
Patterns and Stories. Springer Verlag.
Liu, Ta-Chung. 1960. “Underidentification, Structural Estimation, and Forecasting.”

Econometrica, 28(4): 855–65.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 1997. “I Just Ran Two
Million Regressions.” American Economic Review,
87(2): 178–83.
Sims, Christopher. 1980. “Macroeconomics
and Reality.” Econometrica, 48(1): 1–48.
White, Halbert. 1980. “A HeteroskedasticityConsistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity.” Econometrica,
48(4): 817–38.

This article has been cited by:
1. Garret Christensen, Edward Miguel. 2018. Transparency, Reproducibility, and the Credibility of
Economics Research. Journal of Economic Literature 56:3, 920-980. [Abstract] [View PDF article]
[PDF with links]
2. Thomas Plümper, Richard Traunmüller. 2018. The sensitivity of sensitivity analysis. Political Science
Research and Methods 57, 1-11. [Crossref]
3. Cyrus J. DiCiccio, Joseph P. Romano, Michael Wolf. 2018. Improving weighted least squares inference.
Econometrics and Statistics . [Crossref]
4. Matteo M. Galizzi, Glenn W. Harrison, Marisa Miraldo. Experimental Methods and Behavioral
Insights in Health Economics: Estimating Risk and Time Preferences in Health 1-21. [Crossref]
5. Hristos Doucouliagos, Richard B. Freeman, Patrice Laroche, T. D. Stanley. 2018. How Credible Is
Trade Union Research? Forty Years of Evidence on the Monopoly–Voice Trade-Off. ILR Review 71:2,
287-305. [Crossref]
6. Bernd Hayo. 2018. On Standard-Error-Decreasing Complementarity: Why Collinearity is Not the
Whole Story. Journal of Quantitative Economics 16:1, 289-307. [Crossref]
7. Scott Alan Carson. 2018. The weight of nineteenth century Mexicans in the Western United States.
Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 51:1, 1-12. [Crossref]
8. Rick Hangartner, Paul Cull. Inscrutable Decision Makers: Knightian Uncertainty in Machine
Learning 228-236. [Crossref]
9. John G. Matsusaka. 2018. Public policy and the initiative and referendum: a survey with some new
evidence. Public Choice 174:1-2, 107-143. [Crossref]
10. D. Brent Edwards. Critically Understanding Impact Evaluations: Technical, Methodological,
Organizational, and Political Issues 23-67. [Crossref]
11. Kevin J. Boudreau, Tom Brady, Ina Ganguli, Patrick Gaule, Eva Guinan, Anthony Hollenberg, Karim
R. Lakhani. 2017. A Field Experiment on Search Costs and the Formation of Scientific Collaborations.
The Review of Economics and Statistics 99:4, 565-576. [Crossref]
12. P. Owen. 2017. Evaluating Ingenious Instruments for Fundamental Determinants of Long-Run
Economic Growth and Development. Econometrics 5:3, 38. [Crossref]
13. David Calnitsky, Jonathan P. Latner. 2017. Basic Income in a Small Town: Understanding the Elusive
Effects on Work. Social Problems 64:3, 373-397. [Crossref]
14. Steven J. Klees. 2017. Quantitative Methods in Comparative Education and Other Disciplines: are
they valid?. Educação & Realidade 42:3, 841-858. [Crossref]
15. Chien-Chiang Lee, Chin-Yu Wang, Jhih-Hong Zeng. 2017. Housing price–volume correlations and
boom–bust cycles. Empirical Economics 52:4, 1423-1450. [Crossref]
16. Beliyou Haile, Carlo Azzarri, Cleo Roberts, David J. Spielman. 2017. Targeting, bias, and expected
impact of complex innovations on developing-country agriculture: evidence from Malawi. Agricultural
Economics 48:3, 317-326. [Crossref]
17. Rodrigo Adao, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson. 2017. Nonparametric Counterfactual Predictions
in Neoclassical Models of International Trade. American Economic Review 107:3, 633-689. [Abstract]
[View PDF article] [PDF with links]
18. Joseph P. Romano, Michael Wolf. 2017. Resurrecting weighted least squares. Journal of Econometrics
197:1, 1-19. [Crossref]

19. Carlianne Patrick, Amanda Ross, Heather Stephens. Designing Policies to Spur Economic Growth:
How Regional Scientists Can Contribute to Future Policy Development and Evaluation 119-133.
[Crossref]
20. Bertrand Iooss, Andrea Saltelli. Introduction to Sensitivity Analysis 1103-1122. [Crossref]
21. 2017. OUP accepted manuscript. Cambridge Journal Of Economics . [Crossref]
22. Jeff E. Biddle, Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2017. Theory and Measurement. History of Political Economy
49:Supplement, 34-57. [Crossref]
23. 2016. The Psychology of Human Risk Preferences and Vulnerability to Scare-Mongers: Experimental
Economic Tools for Hypothesis Formulation and Testing. Journal of Cognition and Culture 16:5,
383-414. [Crossref]
24. Denis Cogneau. 2016. History, Data and Economics for Africa: Can We Get Them Less Wrong?:
Reply to Morten Jerven's ‘Trapped between tragedies and miracles: Misunderstanding African
economic growth’. Development Policy Review 34:6, 895-899. [Crossref]
25. Federico Ferretti, Andrea Saltelli, Stefano Tarantola. 2016. Trends in sensitivity analysis practice in
the last decade. Science of The Total Environment 568, 666-670. [Crossref]
26. Kai Jäger. 2016. The Role of Regime Type in the Political Economy of Foreign Reserve Accumulation.
European Journal of Political Economy 44, 79-96. [Crossref]
27. David McGrogan. 2016. THE PROBLEM OF CAUSALITY IN INTERNATIONAL HUMAN
RIGHTS LAW. International and Comparative Law Quarterly 65:03, 615-644. [Crossref]
28. Judith Favereau. 2016. On the analogy between field experiments in economics and clinical trials in
medicine. Journal of Economic Methodology 23:2, 203-222. [Crossref]
29. Don Ross. 2016. Introduction to discussion forum on Glenn W. Harrison’s ‘field experiments and
methodological intolerance’. Journal of Economic Methodology 23:2, 127-129. [Crossref]
30. Richard A. Ashley, Christopher F. Parmeter. 2015. When is it justifiable to ignore explanatory variable
endogeneity in a regression model?. Economics Letters 137, 70-74. [Crossref]
31. Jim Granato, Cong Huang, Kwok Wai Wan, Ching-Hsing Wang, Man Chiu Sunny Wong. 2015.
EITM: An assessment with an application to economic voting. Electoral Studies 40, 372-393.
[Crossref]
32. Ryan Kennedy. 2015. Making useful conflict predictions. Journal of Peace Research 52:5, 649-664.
[Crossref]
33. Marion Fourcade, Etienne Ollion, Yann Algan. 2015. The Superiority of Economists. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 29:1, 89-114. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
34. Judea Pearl. 2015. TRYGVE HAAVELMO AND THE EMERGENCE OF CAUSAL CALCULUS.
Econometric Theory 31:01, 152-179. [Crossref]
35. Seán M. Muller. 2015. Causal Interaction and External Validity: Obstacles to the Policy Relevance of
Randomized Evaluations. The World Bank Economic Review 29:suppl 1, S217-S225. [Crossref]
36. Gary King, Margaret E. Roberts. 2015. How Robust Standard Errors Expose Methodological
Problems They Do Not Fix, and What to Do About It. Political Analysis 23:02, 159-179. [Crossref]
37. Annette N. Brown, Drew B. Cameron, Benjamin D. K. Wood. 2014. Quality evidence for
policymaking: I’ll believe it when I see the replication. Journal of Development Effectiveness 6:3, 215-235.
[Crossref]
38. Michael Peneder, Martin Woerter. 2014. Competition, R&D and innovation: testing the inverted-U
in a simultaneous system. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 24:3, 653-687. [Crossref]
39. Stephen C. Nelson, Peter J. Katzenstein. 2014. Uncertainty, Risk, and the Financial Crisis of 2008.
International Organization 68:02, 361-392. [Crossref]

40. G. W. Harrison. 2014. Cautionary notes on the use of field experiments to address policy issues.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 30:4, 753. [Crossref]
41. Ryan Kennedy, Lydia Tiede. 2013. Economic Development Assumptions and the Elusive Curse of
Oil. International Studies Quarterly 57:4, 760-771. [Crossref]
42. Christopher S. Armstrong. 2013. Discussion of “CEO compensation and corporate risk-taking:
Evidence from a natural experiment”. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56:2-3, 102-111. [Crossref]
43. Joachim Gassen. 2013. Causal inference in empirical archival financial accounting research. Accounting,
Organizations and Society . [Crossref]
44. Julien Labonne. 2013. The local electoral impacts of conditional cash transfers. Journal of Development
Economics 104, 73-88. [Crossref]
45. Glenn W. Harrison. 2013. Field experiments and methodological intolerance. Journal of Economic
Methodology 20:2, 103-117. [Crossref]
46. Scott Alan Carson. 2013. The Significance and Relative Contributions of Demographic, Residence,
and Socioeconomic Status in Nineteenth-Century U.S. BMI Variation. Historical Methods: A Journal
of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 46:2, 67-76. [Crossref]
47. John McCombie, Maureen Pike. 2013. No End to the Consensus in Macroeconomic Theory? A
Methodological Inquiry. American Journal of Economics and Sociology 72:2, 497-528. [Crossref]
48. Martin Gassebner, Michael J. Lamla, James Raymond Vreeland. 2013. Extreme Bounds of Democracy.
Journal of Conflict Resolution 57:2, 171-197. [Crossref]
49. Scott Alan Carson. 2013. Body mass, wealth, and inequality in the 19th century: Joining the debate
surrounding equality and health. Economics & Human Biology 11:1, 90-94. [Crossref]
50. Nancy Cartwright. 2012. Presidential Address: Will This Policy Work for You? Predicting
Effectiveness Better: How Philosophy Helps. Philosophy of Science 79:5, 973-989. [Crossref]
51. Cameron N. McIntosh. 2012. The presence of an error term does not preclude causal inference in
regression: a comment on Krause (2012). Quality & Quantity . [Crossref]
52. Nigel F. B. Allington, John S. L. McCombie, Maureen Pike. 2012. Lessons not learned: from the
collapse of Long-Term Capital Management to the subprime crisis. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics
34:4, 555-582. [Crossref]
53. Christopher J. Gerry. 2012. The journals are full of great studies but can we believe the statistics?
Revisiting the Mass Privatisation – Mortality Debate. Social Science & Medicine 75:1, 14-22. [Crossref]
54. Maren Duvendack, Richard Palmer-Jones. 2012. High Noon for Microfinance Impact Evaluations:
Re-investigating the Evidence from Bangladesh. Journal of Development Studies 1-17. [Crossref]
55. Thomas Kemeny, Michael Storper. 2012. THE SOURCES OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT:
WAGES, HOUSING, AND AMENITY GAPS ACROSS AMERICAN CITIES*. Journal of Regional
Science 52:1, 85-108. [Crossref]
56. G. Andrew Karolyi. 2011. The Ultimate Irrelevance Proposition in Finance?. Financial Review 46:4,
485-512. [Crossref]
57. François Claveau. 2011. Evidential variety as a source of credibility for causal inference: beyond sharp
designs and structural models. Journal of Economic Methodology 18:3, 233-253. [Crossref]
58. G. W. Harrison. 2011. Experimental methods and the welfare evaluation of policy lotteries. European
Review of Agricultural Economics 38:3, 335-360. [Crossref]
59. G. W. Harrison. 2011. Randomisation and Its Discontents. Journal of African Economies 20:4, 626-652.
[Crossref]
60. Judea Pearl. 2011. Statistics and Causality: Separated to Reunite-Commentary on Bryan Dowd's
“Separated at Birth”. Health Services Research 46:2, 421-429. [Crossref]

61. Henk Folmer, Olof Johansson-Stenman. 2011. Does Environmental Economics Produce Aeroplanes
Without Engines? On the Need for an Environmental Social Science. Environmental and Resource
Economics 48:3, 337-361. [Crossref]
62. Thomas Plümper, Vera E. Troeger. 2011. Fixed-Effects Vector Decomposition: Properties,
Reliability, and Instruments. Political Analysis 19:02, 147-164. [Crossref]
63. C. B. Barrett, M. R. Carter. 2010. The Power and Pitfalls of Experiments in Development Economics:
Some Non-random Reflections. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 32:4, 515-548. [Crossref]
64. Richard Berk. 2010. What You Can and Can’t Properly Do with Regression. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 26:4, 481-487. [Crossref]
65. James J. Heckman. 2010. Building Bridges between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches
to Evaluating Policy. Journal of Economic Literature 48:2, 356-398. [Abstract] [View PDF article]
[PDF with links]

