DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?
EVIDENCE FROM THE U. S. HOUSE*
DAVID S. LEE
ENRICO MORETTI
MATTHEW J. BUTLER

I. INTRODUCTION
How do voters influence government policies? An economist’s
answer is that they do so by compelling politicians to adopt
“middle ground” platforms. Competition for votes can force even
the most partisan Republicans and Democrats to moderate their
policy choices. In the extreme case, competition may be so strong
that it leads to “full policy convergence”: opposing parties are
forced to adopt identical policies [Downs 1957].1 More realisti* An earlier version of the paper, “Credibility and Policy Convergence: Evidence from U. S. Roll Call Voting Records,” is online as NBER Working Paper No.
9315, October 2002. We thank David Card, John DiNardo, and Melvin Hinich for
helpful discussions, and David Autor, Hongbin Cai, Anne Case, Dhammika Dharmapala, Justin Wolfers, and participants in workshops at the University of North
Carolina—Chapel Hill, University of Texas—Austin, University of Chicago Department of Economics and Graduate School of Business, Princeton University,
University of California—Los Angeles, Stanford University Graduate School of
Business, University of California—Davis, University of California—Riverside,
and University of California—Irvine, and two anonymous referees for comments
and suggestions. We also thank James Snyder and Michael Ting for providing
data for an earlier draft. This material is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0214351.
1. Empirical studies indicate that Republican and Democratic legislators
vote very differently, even when they share the same constituency. For example,
© 2004 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2004

807

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

There are two fundamentally different views of the role of elections in policy
formation. In one view, voters can affect candidates’ policy choices: competition for
votes induces politicians to move toward the center. In this view, elections have
the effect of bringing about some degree of policy compromise. In the alternative
view, voters merely elect policies: politicians cannot make credible promises to
moderate their policies, and elections are merely a means to decide which one of
two opposing policy views will be implemented. We assess which of these contrasting perspectives is more empirically relevant for the U. S. House. Focusing on
elections decided by a narrow margin allows us to generate quasi-experimental
estimates of the impact of a “randomized” change in electoral strength on subsequent representatives’ roll-call voting records. We find that voters merely elect
policies: the degree of electoral strength has no effect on a legislator’s voting
behavior. For example, a large exogenous increase in electoral strength for the
Democratic party in a district does not result in shifting both parties’ nominees to
the left. Politicians’ inability to credibly commit to a compromise appears to
dominate any competition-induced convergence in policy.

808

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Poole and Rosenthal [1984] show that senators from the same state but from
different political parties have different voting records. This is inconsistent with
Downs’ original model, in which candidates adopt identical positions—“complete
policy convergence.” See also Snyder and Groseclose [2000] and Levitt [1996].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

cally, competition leads to “partial policy convergence”: candidates do pursue more moderate policies, even if they are not
forced to adopt identical platforms [Wittman 1983; Calvert 1985].
This less rigid and arguably more realistic understanding of
Downs’ insight has become central to how economists think about
political competition. Indeed, the so-called “Downsian paradigm”
has remained the backbone of many models in political economy.
There is, however, a growing recognition of a serious shortcoming of this paradigm. In a recent survey of the literature,
Besley and Case [2003] emphasize that the assumptions about
politicians’ commitment and motivation in the Downsian paradigm “are unreasonable and outcomes are highly unrobust to
deviations from them.” Downsian convergence depends on the
assumption that elected politicians always implement the policies
that they promised as candidates. But Alesina [1988] shows that
when partisan politicians cannot credibly promise to implement
more moderate policies, the result can be full policy divergence:
the winning candidate, after obtaining office, simply pursues his
most-preferred policy. In this case, voters fail to compel candidates to reach any kind of policy compromise.
What emerges, then, are two fundamentally different views
of the role of elections in a representative democracy. On the one
hand, when electoral promises are credible—as in a Downsian
partial convergence— candidates seek middle ground policies,
and general elections bring about some degree of policy “compromise.” On the other hand, when promises to enact moderate
policies are not credible—as in full policy divergence— general
elections are merely a means to decide which candidate’s preferred policy will be implemented. Which of these two competing
views is empirically more relevant? This paper assesses the relative importance of the two contrasting perspectives in explaining
how Representatives vote in the U. S. House.
As is apparent from Alesina’s [1988] analysis of the role of
credibility, the two broad views have sharply different predictions
for how a politician’s electoral strength influences her policy
choices. When politicians have incentives to moderate their platforms—as in partial policy convergence—the relative electoral

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

809

2. Our empirical strategy obviously accounts for the fact that Democrats are
more liberal than Republican. That is, the roll-call behavior of a winner of an
electoral race where a Democrat held the seat will tend to be more liberal simply
because— due to the advantage of incumbency—the winner will more likely be a
Democrat. This fact in itself would cause a difference in voting records, even if
Representatives ignored electoral pressures and simply voted their own ideological position. It is easy to account for this factor—as we will show in Section II.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

strength of the two parties matters. More specifically, when electoral support is high, a candidate can afford to vote in a relatively
more partisan way if he is elected; a weaker candidate would be
forced to choose a more moderate policy. An increase in electoral
strength for the Democratic party in a district, for example, would
cause both parties’ nominees to shift to the “left.” On the other
hand, when voters do not believe promises of policy compromises—as in full policy divergence—the relative electoral
strength of the two candidates is irrelevant, as politicians simply
pursue their own personal policy views. That is, an increase in
electoral strength for the Democratic party in a district leaves
legislators’ actions unchanged.
Therefore, an assessment of the relative importance of the
two views requires estimating the effect of a candidate’s electoral
strength on subsequent roll-call voting records. To do so, we
consider electoral races where a Democrat holds the seat—and
hence an electoral advantage—and measure the roll-call voting
records of the winners of these elections. We measure the extent
to which they are more liberal than the voting records of winners
of elections where the Republican had held the seat; i.e., where
the Democrat was relatively weaker.2 Of course, which of the two
parties holds a district seat—and hence the electoral advantage—is clearly endogenously determined, influenced by the political leanings of the voters, the quality of candidates, resources
available to the campaigns, and other unmeasured characteristics of the district and the candidates. A naive comparison that
does not account for these differences between Democratic and
Republican districts is likely to yield biased estimates. What is
needed is an exogenous variation in who holds the seat—and
hence greater electoral strength—in order to measure how politicians’ actions respond to the odds of winning an election.
To isolate such exogenous variation, we exploit a quasi experiment embedded in the Congressional electoral system that
generates essentially “random assignment” of which party holds
a seat—and therefore which party holds the electoral advantage.
In particular, we focus our analysis on the set of electoral races in

810

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

3. The voting score data include (1) the actual roll-call data from ICPSR
Study 4 “United States Congressional Roll Call Voting Records,” (2) Groseclose,
Levitt, and Snyder’s [1999] Inflation-Adjusted ADA Scores [Groseclose 2002], (3)
McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal’s [1997] DW-NOMINATE scores [Poole 2002a], (4)
Poole and Daniels’ [1985] Interest Group Ratings [Poole 2002b], and (5) Poole’s
[1999] rank order data [Poole 2002c].
4. This leaves open the question of how candidates are selected. There are
several models where candidates are endogenous. (See, for example, Persson and
Tabellini [2000] for an introduction to this literature.) In this paper we take the
candidates’ ideologies as exogenous. We return to this point below.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

which the incumbent party had barely won the previous election
(say by 0.01 percent of the vote). The key identifying assumption
is that districts where the Democrats barely won are comparable—in all other ways—to districts where the Republicans barely
won. We present empirical evidence that strongly supports this
assumption: Democratic and Republican districts are in general
very different, but among close elections, they are similar in every
characteristic that we examine, including various demographic
characteristics of the population, racial composition, size of the
district, income levels, and geographical location. Our quasi experiment, then, addresses the endogeneity problem by isolating
arguably independent and exogenous variation in candidates’
electoral strength across Congressional districts.
Using this regression-discontinuity design and voting record
data from the U. S. House (1946 –1995), we find that the degree of
electoral strength has no effect on a legislator’s voting behavior.3
Candidates with weak electoral support do not adopt more moderate positions than do stronger candidates, holding other factors
constant. For example, a large exogenous increase in electoral
strength for the Democratic party in a district does not result in
shifting both parties’ nominees to the left. This suggests that
voters seem not to affect politicians’ choices during general elections; instead, they appear to merely elect policies through choosing a legislator. That is, they do not influence policy through their
Representatives’ choices as much as they are implicitly presented
with policy choices by different candidates.4
Our findings are consistent with the inability of opposing
candidates to credibly commit to a policy compromise. It appears
that the central prediction of the Downsian paradigm—that individual politicians’ policy choices are constrained by voters’ sentiments— has little empirical support, at least in the context of
U. S. House general elections. Our findings provide some empirical justification for the notion that candidates confront a credi-

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

811

II. BACKGROUND

AND

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

II.A. Role of Credibility in Political Competition
Voters can influence policy in two distinct ways. Competing
political candidates have incentives to adopt positions that reflect
the preferences of the electorate because doing so raises the
chances they will win the election. That is, voters can affect the
policy choices of politicians. Alternatively, voters always impact
policy outcomes by selecting a leader among several candidates,
who each may have already decided on a particular policy based
on other reasons. In this way, voters may simply elect policies.
Whether voters affect or elect policies depends on whether or not
candidates are able to make credible promises to implement
moderate policies.
A large class of models of political competition assumes that
they can. The most well-known example is the simple “median

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

bility problem. This notion has been explicitly adopted in recent
theoretical analyses [Besley and Coate 1997, 1998].
It is important to recognize that our findings say little about
whether members of the U. S. House generally represent their
“constituencies.” Instead, our analysis focuses on the role of general elections in inducing candidates with different policy stances
to move toward the center. Although we find a small effect of the
pressures of a general election on candidates, this does not imply
that election outcomes do not “represent” the desires of the electorate. First, and most obviously, voters still do choose between
the two available policy platforms. Second, “representativeness”
does not necessarily occur only through general elections. Preelection channels (primary elections, for example) may also be
important in inducing representativeness. Indeed, within each
district, the Republican and Democratic nominees may, respectively, represent the “median” Republican and “median” Democratic voter.
The paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III provide
background and motivation for our analysis, and describe our
empirical strategy, first informally, and then within a formal
conceptual framework. Section IV describes the context and the
data, and Section V presents our empirical results. We relate our
findings to the existing literature in Section VI. Section VII
concludes.

812

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

voter” model of political competition [Downs 1957]. Two candidates, who care only about winning office, compete for votes
by taking a stance in a single dimensional policy space. Voters
cast their vote based on these positions, and the equilibrium
result is that the politicians carry out identical policies—the
one most preferred by the “median voter.” In this extreme
example, voters have a powerful effect on politicians’ choices, to
the point where it is irrelevant which of the two candidates is
ultimately elected.
A similar outcome results when opposing candidates care not
only about winning the election, but also about the implemented
policies themselves. Opposing parties may not choose identical
positions, but in general electoral competition will compel them to
choose policies more moderate than their most preferred choices
[Wittman 1983; Calvert 1985]. The basic insight that voters affect
candidates’ positions by inducing spatial competition is robust to
various generalizations of the simple model utilized by Downs
[Osborne 1995].
But it is much less robust to the assumption that candidates
can commit to policy pronouncements, as emphasized in Besley
and Case [2003]. When politicians have ideological preferences
over policy outcomes, credibility becomes an issue. Specifically,
Alesina [1988] points out that Downs’ equilibrium may fall apart
if parties care about policies and there is no way to make binding
precommitments to announced policies. After winning the election, what incentive does a legislator have to keep a promise of a
more moderate policy? In a one-shot game, the only time-consistent
equilibrium is that candidates carry out their ex post mostpreferred policy. Electoral pressures do not at all compel opposing
candidates to moderate their positions. Voters’ only role in affecting policy outcomes is to elect a politician, whose policy position is
unaffected by electoral pressures.
In a repeated election framework, both policy convergence
and divergence are possible, as politicians can establish credibility through building reputations. If voters and opposing
parties believe that there are sufficiently high costs to deviating from moderate promises, it is possible to achieve some
degree of policy convergence [Alesina 1988]. Voters affect policies because of candidates’ incentives to maintain a reputation.
But if both parties and voters do not expect any compromise,
the fully divergent outcome occurs in every election. Candi-

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

813

5. It is also true that even if discount rates are sufficiently low, the fully
divergent outcome still remains a subgame perfect equilibrium of the repeated
election game.
6. The full convergence hypothesis has been tested, and rejected by many
authors. For example, Poole and Rosenthal [1984] show that senators from the
same state but from different political parties have different voting records. For a
discussion of empirical regularities in the literature, see Snyder and Ting [2001a].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

dates do not deviate from their ex post most-preferred policy,
and voters only elect policies.5
The goal of this paper is to examine which phenomenon is
more empirically relevant for describing roll-call voting patterns
of U. S. House Representatives. Does the expectation of how
voters will cast their ballot affect how legislators vote, or do voters
simply elect a legislator among candidates with fixed policy positions? The answer to this question has important implications for
understanding and modeling policy formation in a representative
democracy.
If voters primarily affect politicians’ decisions, then “centripetal” political forces generated by the broader voting population
would largely outweigh any “centrifugal” forces that pull candidates’ positions apart (e.g., party discipline, special interest
groups). It would also imply that candidates are able to convince
voters that they will compromise on policy, through the building
of reputations or other mechanisms. The Downsian paradigm
would then seem to be a reasonable, first-order description of
policy formation as it relates to U. S. House elections.
On the other hand, if voters primarily elect policies, then
“centrifugal” forces largely would dominate any Downsian convergence. It would then become more important, for example, to
understand how a nominee, and the policies that she supports, is
chosen by the party: primary elections could be more influential
than general elections for policy formation. It would also provide
an empirical basis for assuming that candidates face a serious
credibility problem in their policy pronouncements. There is a
growing recognition of the inadequacy of the Downsian paradigm
on this point [Besley and Case 2003].
Existing studies have established that, controlling for constituency characteristics, Democratic representatives possess
more liberal voting records than Republican members of Congress.6 This constitutes strong evidence against the extreme case
of complete policy convergence (e.g., the median voter theorem),
but is too stringent a test of the more general notion of Downsian
electoral competition. Therefore, to measure the relative impor-

814

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

II.B. Identification Strategy
We now describe the main difficulties of addressing this
question, and how we confront them with our identification strategy. Here we will intentionally be less formal, in order to provide
the intuition of our approach. A more rigorous exposition of our
conceptual and econometric framework is presented in the next
section. Throughout the discussion we assume a two-party political system.
The most straightforward way to determine whether voters
primarily affect or elect policy choices is to simply compare candidates’ most-preferred policies (hereinafter “bliss points”) and
the policies they would actually choose. If the voting records were
more moderate than their bliss points, this would indicate that
the expected voting behavior of the electorate factored into the
candidates’ decisions. If there were no difference between their
choices and their bliss points, this would imply that voters merely
influence the relative odds of which of the two candidates’ policies
is “elected.” Unfortunately, such a comparison is impossible, since
there are no reliable measures of candidates’ bliss points.
In this paper we utilize a simple empirical test of whether
voters primarily affect or elect policy choices, based on how Representatives’ roll-call voting behavior is affected by exogenous
changes in their electoral strength. The test is based on the
predictions of Alesina’s [1988] model of electoral competition. In
the next section we formally develop the idea, but the intuition is
very simple. If candidates are constrained by their constituents’
preferences, we should observe that exogenous changes in their
electoral strength have an impact on how they intend to vote if
elected to Congress. On the other hand, if promises to adopt
moderate policies are noncredible, then the electoral strength of a
candidate should be irrelevant to how (s)he intends to vote.
Throughout the paper we use the following notation for the
timing of elections. t and t ⫹ 1 represent separate electoral
cycles. For example, when t ⫽ 1992, it includes the 1992 campaign, the November 1992 election, and the 1993–1994 Congressional session. Similarly, t ⫹ 1 would include the 1994 campaign,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

tance of competition-induced convergence, it is necessary to empirically distinguish between partial convergence, where voters
affect politicians’ policy choices— despite the undeniable party
effect—and complete divergence, where voters merely elect policies. This is the goal of our study.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

815

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

the November 1994 election, and the 1995–1996 Congressional
session.
Our strategy is based on the following thought experiment.
Imagine that we could decide the outcome of Congressional electoral races in, say, 1992 with the flip of a coin (but we allow all
subsequent elections to be determined in the usual way). This
initial randomization guarantees that the group of districts
where the Democrat won would be, in all other respects, similar
to the newly Republican districts. For example, the two groups of
districts would be similar in the ideological positions of the voters
and candidates, the demographic characteristics, the resources
that were available to the candidates, and so forth.
Because incumbents are known to possess an electoral advantage, the outcome of the 1992 race would impact what happens in the 1994 election. Democrats are likely to be in a relatively stronger electoral position where they are incumbents, and
similarly for Republicans. The key point is that the random
assignment of who wins in 1992 essentially generates random
assignment in which party’s nominee has greater electoral
strength for the 1994 election. We could use this change in electoral strength to test the hypothesis of complete divergence
against the alternative of partial convergence.
Specifically, we could examine the 1995–1996 voting “scores”
of the winners of the 1994 elections where the Democrats had
held the seat during the 1994 campaign, and compare them with
the scores of winners of elections where a Republican held the
seat. This difference would represent a valid causal effect of who
holds the seat during the 1994 electoral races on 1995–1996
voting records. We call this the “overall effect,” and it is the sum
of two components.
The first component would reflect that the 1995–1996 voting
scores of the winners where a Democrat held the seat during the
1994 electoral race will tend to be more liberal simply because—
due to the electoral advantage of holding the seat—the winner
will more likely be a Democrat. And as we know, Democrats have
more liberal voting scores. This first component reflects how
voters elect policies: how they impact policy by simply altering the
relative odds of which party’s nominee is chosen. As we show
more formally in the next section, this component can be directly
estimated by answering the questions how much more likely is
the winner to be a Democrat if the seat is already held by a

816

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Democrat and what is the expected difference between how Republicans and Democrats vote, other things constant.
The remaining, second component would reflect how candidates might respond to an exogenous increase or decrease in the
probability of winning the election in 1994. If legislators are
pressured to keep their election promises, then a Democrat who is
challenging an incumbent Republican in 1994 would be expected
to have less liberal voting records in 1995–1996 (if elected) compared with an incumbent Democrat. After all, the challenger
would be in a much weaker electoral position than the incumbent.
This second component reflects how expected voting behavior
affects the policy choices of candidates. It is computed by subtracting the first component from the overall effect.
The relative magnitudes of the two components indicate
which equilibrium—full divergence or partial convergence—is
relatively more important. If the “elect” component is dominant,
it suggests full policy divergence: politicians simply vote their
own policy views, unaffected by electoral pressures. If the “affect”
component is important, it suggests partial policy convergence:
policy choices are constrained by electoral pressure imparted by
voters.
What allows us to perform this decomposition into the two
components? The initial “random assignment” of who wins the
1992 election does. Without the random assignment, it would be
difficult to distinguish between any of these effects and differences due to spurious reasons. After all, in the real world, the
party that holds a district seat—and the electoral advantage—is
clearly endogenously determined, influenced by the ideologies of
the voters and candidates, and other unmeasured characteristics
of the districts. A naive comparison that does not account for all
these unobservable differences between Democratic and Republican districts is likely to yield biased estimates.
For example, Democratic legislators will have more liberal
voting scores than Republicans (for simplicity, consider the period
of the 1990s). But Democrats are also more likely to be elected in
places like Massachusetts and than in places like Alabama. So it
is not clear how much of this voting gap reflects the typical
difference between Republican and Democratic nominees and
how much of the gap reflects the typical difference between Representatives from Massachusetts and Alabama.
How do we generate the initial “flip of the coin” decision of
who wins the 1992 election? We use a quasi experiment that is

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

817

III. THEORETICAL

AND

ECONOMETRIC FRAMEWORK

In this section we 1) formally define what it means to ask the
question of whether voters primarily affect or elect policies, and
2) explain how our empirical strategy is able to distinguish between these two phenomena.
III.A. Model
We utilize the repeated election framework of Alesina [1988],
adopting that study’s modeling conventions and notation. Consider two parties, D (Democrats) and R (Republicans), in a particular Congressional district. The policy space is unidimensional,
where party D’s and R’s per-period policy preferences are represented by quadratic loss functions, u(l ) ⫽ ⫺(1/ 2)(l ⫺ c) 2 and
v(l ) ⫽ ⫺(1/ 2)l 2 , respectively, where l is the policy variable and
c(⬎0), and 0, are their respective bliss points. As in Alesina, the
analysis makes no distinction between the “party” and an individual nominee, so that the “electoral strength” of the party in a
district is equivalent to the “electoral strength” of the party’s
nominee in that district, during the election. Also, candidates’/
parties’ bliss points are assumed to be exogenously determined.7
The timing of elections is as follows. Before election t, voters
7. This framework has little to say on the question of how candidates are
selected. Alternative frameworks are possible and may generate different predictions. For example, the models proposed by Bernhardt and Ingberman [1985] and
Banks and Kiewiet [1989] are quite different in spirit from the model used here.
In those models, the challenger is at disadvantage because she cannot adopt the
incumbent’s position and is therefore forced to take a more extreme position. In
equilibrium the low probability of defeating incumbent members of Congress
deters potentially strong rivals from challenging them [Banks and Kiewiet 1989].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

embedded in the Congressional electoral system. Specifically, our
empirical strategy focuses on elections that were decided by a
very narrow margin in 1992, as revealed by the final vote tally.
For example, we begin by examining elections that were decided
by less than a 2 percent vote share. We argue that among these
elections, it is virtually random which of the two parties won the
seat [Lee 2003]. For the sake of exposition, we defer to a later
section the discussion of why we believe this to be true, and the
description of the empirical evidence that strongly supports this
assumption. We have used 1992 and 1994 in this explanation of
our empirical strategy. In practice, in our empirical analysis we
use data for the period 1946 –1995.

818

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

8. ␭ is used to characterize the entire efficient frontier. ␭*, on the other hand,
denotes the Nash bargaining equilibrium.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

form expectations of the parties’ policies, denoted x e and y e . At
this point, the outcome of the election is uncertain to all agents in
the model, with the probability of party D winning being P, which
is “common knowledge.” P( x e ,y e ) is a function of x e and y e , and by
assumption, when x e ⬎ y e , then ⳵P/⳵ x e , ⳵P/⳵ y e ⬍ 0; that is, more
votes can be gained by moderating the policy position. If party D
wins the election, x is implemented, and if party R wins, y is
implemented. A rational expectations equilibrium is assumed
throughout; x ⫽ x e , and y ⫽ y e . The game then repeats for period
t ⫹ 1. Note that period t includes both the election and the
subsequent Congressional session, and similarly for t ⫹ 1. For
example, if t ⫽ 1992, t refers to the November 1992 election and
the roll-call votes RC t in the 1993–1994 Congressional session;
t ⫹ 1 refers to the November 1994 election and the roll-call votes
RC t⫹1 in the 1995–1996 session.
Alesina [1988] shows that the efficient frontier is given by
x* ⫽ y* ⫽ ␭c, where ␭ 僆 (0,1). Because of the concavity preferences, both parties prefer a moderate policy with certainty to a
fair bet. Three Nash equilibria are possible.
(a) Complete Convergence: x* ⫽ y* ⫽ ␭*c.
In this equilibrium, opposing parties agree to a moderate
policy, by Nash bargaining on the efficient frontier. The “Folk
Theorem” equilibrium is one where both parties “announce” the
same, moderate policy, and the voters expect the moderate outcome, but as soon as a party deviates from the announced position, reputation is lost, and the game reverts to the uncooperative
outcome, y* ⫽ 0, x* ⫽ c. As long as discount rates are sufficiently
low, promises to adopt policy compromises are credible.
For our purposes, the key result is that dx*/dP* ⫽ dy*/dP* ⫽
(d␭*/dP*)c ⬎ 0, where P* represents the underlying “popularity” of party D: the probability that party D would win at fixed
policy positions, x e ⫽ c and y e ⫽ 0. 8 An increase in P* represents
an exogenous increase in the popularity of party D, which would
boost party D’s “bargaining power” so that the equilibrium moves
closer to her bliss point. This exogenous increase comes about
from a “helicopter drop” of Democrats in the district, or campaign
resources, or the advantage that comes from being the incumbent
in the district. In this equilibrium, policy choices are implicitly

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

819

9. Our extension should not be confused with that of Alesina and Spear
[1988], in which parties agree to split the benefits of office. In our extension, they
cannot split the benefits of office. This case should also not be confused with the
partial convergent equilibria that can arise if discount rates are too low to support
fully convergent equilibria. Alesina [1988] proves existence of these equilibria.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

constrained by voters. Thus, when dx*/dP*, d y*/dP* ⬎ 0, we
say that voters affect candidates’ policy choices.
Indeed, in this equilibrium—similar to Downs’ original “median voter” model—voters exclusively affect policy choices, and do
not elect policies at all: it is irrelevant for policy which party is
actually elected.
(b) Partial Convergence: 0 ⱕ y* ⱕ x* ⱕ c.
Is the result that voters affect policies—dx*/dP*, d y*/dP* ⬎
0—robust to minor deviations from the complete convergence
equilibrium? We show that it is. This agrees with our intuition
that voters can induce policy compromise, even if they cannot
force them to adopt identical positions. It also agrees with our
intuition that a rejection of complete convergence says little about
the relative degree to which voters affect or elect policies. Rejecting complete convergence simply implies that y* ⬍ x*, but nothing about whether 0 ⬍ y* or x* ⬍ c.
It is possible to extend Alesina’s model to allow for parties to
care about winning the seat, per se, in addition to caring about
the policy outcome.9 The result is that in general, 0 ⱕ y* ⱕ x* ⱕ
c, because there are values where x ⫽ y is not Pareto efficient.
Both parties can be made better off by one party moving closer to
its bliss point, because there is an explicit benefit to obtaining
office. A detailed proof is available on request.
The important point, for our purposes, is that the comparative static dx*/dP*, d y*/dP* ⬎ 0 is robust to this logical extension to the model. With an exogenously higher P*, party D has a
better “bargaining position” and therefore can compel the parties
to agree on a position closer to party D’s bliss point.
(c) Complete Divergence: x* ⫽ c, y* ⫽ 0.
In this equilibrium, voters expect nothing else than the parties to carry out their bliss points if elected, and the parties do
just this. This can arise if promises to implement policy compromises are not credible. In this case, an increase in P* now does
nothing to the equilibrium: dx*/dP* ⫽ d y*/dP* ⫽ 0. This is a
“corner solution,” whereby an exogenous shock to P* has no effect
on candidates positions. Here, voters merely elect politicians’
fixed policies.

820

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

III.B. Estimating Framework
The above framework directly leads to our empirical strategy. Note first that the roll-call voting record RC t of the representative in the district following the election t can be written as
(1)

RC t ⫽ 共1 ⫺ D t兲 y t ⫹ D t x t,

where D t is the indicator variable for whether the Democrat won
election t. A similar equation applies for RC t⫹1 . Simply put, only
the winning candidate’s intended policy is ultimately observable.
In Appendix 1 we provide conditions under which the above
expression can be transformed into
(2)

RC t ⫽ constant ⫹ ␲0 P*t ⫹ ␲1 Dt ⫹ εt

(3)

RC t⫹1 ⫽ constant ⫹ ␲0 P*t⫹1 ⫹ ␲1 Dt⫹1 ⫹ εt⫹1 ,

where P* is the measure of the electoral strength of party D—the
probability of a party D victory at fixed platforms c and 0 —and ε
reflects heterogeneity in bliss points across districts. This equa-

10. Of course, the equilibrium depends on candidates not discounting the
future too much.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Among the above three equilibria, the full convergence equilibrium is not very realistic, and has already been empirically
rejected by several authors. But a rejection of full convergence
says little about whether politicians’ behaviors are better characterized by partial convergence (voters can affect policy outcomes) or complete policy divergence (voters only elect policies).
Distinguishing between these two equilibria is our goal. For this
purpose, the key result of the theoretical framework is that differentiating between partial and complete divergence is equivalent to assessing whether dx*/dP*, d y*/dP* ⬎ 0 or dx*/dP*,
d y*/dP* ⫽ 0.
We assume that voters are forward-looking and have rational
expectations. This implies that voting records RC t⫹1—roll-call
votes after the election—are on average equal to voters’ expectations. It is important to note that this is not the same as assuming
that candidates can make binding precommitments. Politicians
always have the option of not carrying out their preelection policy
pronouncements. But in Alesina’s repeated game equilibrium,
candidates do carry out their “announced” policies because of the
need to maintain a reputation.10

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

821

(4)

D
R
⫺ P *t⫹1
兴
E关RC t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关RC t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 0兴 ⫽ ␲ 0关P *t⫹1
D
R
⫺ P t⫹1
兴⫽␥
⫹ ␲ 1关P t⫹1

(5)

E关RC t兩D t ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关RC t兩D t ⫽ 0兴 ⫽ ␲ 1

(6)

D
R
E关D t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关D t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 0兴 ⫽ P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
,

where D and R superscripts denote which party held the seat—
D
deand hence held the electoral advantage. For example, P t⫹1
notes the equilibrium probability of a Democrat victory in t ⫹ 1
given that a Democrat held the seat during the campaign of t ⫹
R
1; P *t⫹1
represents the “electoral strength” of the Democrat during the campaign of t ⫹ 1, given that a Republican held the seat.
D
R
Note that while we cannot estimate P *t⫹1
and P *t⫹1
, we can
D
R
11
estimate the P t⫹1 and P t⫹1 from the data.
These three equations form the basis of our empirical analysis. Equation (4) shows that the total effect ␥ of a Democratic
victory in t on voting records RC t⫹1 is the sum of two components,
D
R
D
R
␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
], and the remainder, ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
]. The first
term is the “elect” component. The second term is the “affect”
component. The equation shows that the overall effect ␥ can be
estimated by the simple difference in voting scores RC t⫹1 between districts won by Democrats and Republicans in t.
The next two equations show how to estimate the “elect”
11. It is important to distinguish between P* and P. P* is a measure of the
underlying “popularity” of a party, the probability that party D will win if parties
D and R are expected to choose c and 0, respectively. A change in P* represents
an exogenous change in popularity. On the other hand, P is the probability that
party D will win, at whatever policies the parties are expected to choose.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

tion simply parameterizes the derivatives dx*/dP*, d y*/dP* as
␲0. It also allows an independent effect of party, ␲1, which is
reasonable given the existing evidence that party affiliation is an
important determinant of roll-call voting records. In this equation, partial convergence (voters affect policy choices) implies that
␲0 ⬎ 0. Full divergence (voters only elect policies) implies that
␲0 ⫽ 0.
In general, we cannot observe P*, so equation (2) cannot be
directly estimated by OLS. But suppose that one could randomize
D t . Then D t would be independent of ε t and P *t . Also, if bliss
points are exogenous—and hence are not influenced by who won
the previous election—then D t will have no impact on ε t⫹1 . It
follows that

822

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

12. As will be evident below, in principle, one could obtain an alternative
estimate of ␲1, by examining the difference in records RC t⫹1 among close elections
in time t ⫹ 1. In practice, however, this makes little difference because we are
pooling data from many years (i.e., the difference between estimating ␲1 from data
1946 –1994 and estimating it using data from 1948 –1994).
13. More formally, without random assignment of D t , the three expressions
would become
E关RC t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关RC t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 0兴

⫽

␥ ⫹ E关εt⫹1 兩Dt ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关εt⫹1 兩Dt ⫽ 0兴

E关RC t兩D t ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关RC t兩D t ⫽ 0兴

⫽

␲0 共E关P*t 兩Dt ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关P*t 兩Dt ⫽ 0兴兲
⫹␲1 ⫹ E关εt 兩Dt ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关εt 兩Dt ⫽ 0兴

E关D t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 1兴 ⫺ E关D t⫹1兩D t ⫽ 0兴

D
R
⫽ Pt⫹1
⫺ Pt⫹1
.

It is clear, from the expressions above, that without random assignment, the
parameter estimates ␥ and ␲1 would be biased.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

D
R
component, which is the product of ␲1 and [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
]. ␲1 is
12
D
R
estimated by the difference in voting records RC t . P t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1
is estimated by the difference in the fraction of districts won by
Democrats in t ⫹ 1.
D
R
The “affect” component, ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
], can be estimated
D
R
by ␥ ⫺ ␲ 1 [P t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1 ]. If voters merely “elect” policies (complete divergence), we should observe little change in the candidates’ intended policies following an exogenous increase in the
D
R
probability of victory; that is, ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
] should be small.
If voters not only choose politicians, but also affect their policy
choices (partial convergence), candidates should move toward
their bliss points in response to an exogenously higher probability
D
R
of winning; that is, ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
] should be relatively large.
This simple decomposition allows us to make quantitative statements about the relative importance of the “affect” and “elect”
phenomena. We can compute what fraction of the total effect ␥ is
D
R
explained by the “elect component” ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
], and what
D
R
fraction by the “affect component” ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1 ⫺ P *t⫹1 ].
Note that the initial “random assignment” of D t is crucial
here. Without this, the estimated differences above would in
general be biased for the quantities ␥, and ␲1.13 As an example,
without this random assignment, the simple difference in how
Republicans and Democrats vote after election t would reflect
both ␲1, and that candidates are likely to have more liberal “bliss
points” where Democrats hold the seat.
We argue that the examination of suitably “close” elections in
period t isolates “as good as random assignment” in D t . As would
be expected from a valid regression-discontinuity design, among

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

823

IV. ROLL-CALL VOTING RECORDS

IN THE

U. S. HOUSE

IV.A. Context
There are several reasons why the U. S. House of Representatives provides an ideal setting in which to empirically assess
whether voters primarily affect or elect policies. First, the U. S.
federal legislative body is virtually a two-party system, and policy
convergence is frequently modeled in a two-party context. When
there are more than two candidates, the basic insight of Downs’
[1957] approach to policy convergence arguments becomes more
complicated (see Osborne [1995]).
Second, it is well-known that Democrats and Republicans
have different (and often directly opposing) policy positions. It is
meaningful to ask whether electoral competition compels opposing parties’ nominees to moderate their positions in the face of
strong incentives to vote along party lines. If the U. S. House were
a relatively nonpartisan environment (with “bliss points” relatively close together), the distinction between voters affecting or
electing policies would be less important, and a test to distinguish
between them less useful.

14. See, for example, Poole and Rosenthal [1984], Levitt [1996], and Snyder
and Groseclose [2000].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

elections decided by a very narrow margin, as long as there is
some unpredictable component of the ultimate vote tally, who
wins the election will be mostly determined by pure chance (e.g.,
unpredictable components of voter turnout on election day). This
is shown more formally in Appendix 1.
By now it should be clear why it is necessary to examine the
impact of who wins in t on RC t⫹1 , roll-call votes in period t ⫹ 1.
The impact of who wins in t on RC t , roll-call votes in t, only yields
␲1. By estimating ␲1 alone, it is only possible to test complete
convergence ␲1 ⫽ 0. This extreme hypothesis has already been
tested by several studies.14 But ␲1 alone is not sufficient to say
anything about the size of the “elect” phenomenon relative to the
“affect” phenomenon. It is not sufficient for testing full divergence
against partial convergence, and hence it is not sufficient for
evaluating the Downsian perspective versus the alternative view
that politicians face difficulties in credibly committing to policy
compromises.

824

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

IV.B. Data Description
We now discuss the choice of the dependent variable.15 There
are several alternative ways to measure Representatives’ voting
on legislation. A widely used measure is a voting score provided
by the liberal political organization, Americans for Democratic
Action (ADA). For each Congress, the ADA chooses about twenty
high-profile roll-call votes, and creates an index that varies between 0 and 100 for each Representative of the House. Higher
scores correspond to a more “liberal” voting record. Throughout
the paper our preferred voting record index is the ADA score.
Later, we show that our results are robust to many alternative
interest groups scores and other voting record indices.
We utilize data on ADA scores for all Representatives in the
U. S. House from 1946 –1995, linked to election returns data
during that period.16 There is considerable variation in ADA
scores within each party. For example, the distribution of ADA
scores for Democrat and Republican Representatives in the three
15. All the data and the programs used in this paper are available at http://
www.econ.ucla.edu/moretti/papers.html
16. To make the comparison across Congresses possible, we follow the literature and use “adjusted” ADA scores throughout the paper. This adjustment to the
nominal ADA score, was devised by Groseclose, Levitt, and Snyder [1999].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Third, the U. S. House is arguably the most likely setting in
which to observe policy convergence, if establishing reputations is
important. U. S. House elections are held every two years, and
there are no term limits (as opposed to gubernatorial and presidential elections), meaning that political careers can consist of
several terms in office. Furthermore, political tenure in the House
is often a stepping-stone to participating in electoral races for
higher offices. For these reasons, it is plausible that candidates
for the U. S. House have high discount factors, which would allow
reputation to support convergent equilibria.
Finally, our empirical analysis focuses on Representatives’
voting records. These votes are directly observable, and are part
of the public record. In principle, voters can compare a legislator’s
record with their platforms and promises as candidates (and
opponents can advertise any deviations during election campaigns). Convergent equilibria of the kind described in Alesina
[1988] require that policy positions are perfectly observable by
voters and that it can be determined whether politicians deviate
from policy pronouncements.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

825

17. Poole and Rosenthal [1997] note that a single dimension would be unlikely to capture the division between Northern and Southern Democrats during
the Civil Rights Era. Therefore, the NOMINATE procedure estimates a twodimensional measure of ideology where the first dimension captures party loyalty
and can be thought of as a liberal to conservative scale, and the second dimension
captures the issues of race that divided the Democrats until the mid-1970s. To
remain consistent with our discussion of a single ideological dimension, we restrict our analysis to the first dimension during the period where the second
dimension had little predictive power. Specifically, we restrict our DW-NOMINATE analysis to 1975 and beyond. However, we have reestimated our models
including DW-NOMINATE data for the entire 1946 –1995 period and obtained
very similar results. For completeness, we have also reestimated our ADA models
including only data for the 1975–1995 period and obtained very similar results.
We use the DW-NOMINATE scores as opposed to the Poole and Rosenthal’s [1991]
earlier D-NOMINATE scores because the DW data cover up through the 106th
Congress while the D-NOMINATE data ends with the 99th Congress. McCarty,
Poole, and Rosenthal [1997] note that the D-NOMINATE and DW-NOMINATE
scores are highly correlated where both scores are available. See Poole and
Rosenthal [1997] for a description of the NOMINATE procedure. Poole’s [1999]
rank order data yield similar results.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

most recent Congresses shows significant overlapping between
the parties. It is not uncommon for Democrat representatives to
vote more conservatively than Republican candidates, and vice
versa.
One advantage of using ADA scores is that it is a widely used
index in the literature. However, one limitation is that it includes
only twenty votes per Congress, and the choice of what issues to
include and what weight to assign to each issue is necessarily
arbitrary. To assess how robust our results are to alternative
measures of “liberalness” of roll-call votes, we have reestimated
all our models using three alternative sets of voting record
measures.
First, we use the DW-NOMINATE scores constructed by
McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal [1997]. Poole and Rosenthal
[1985] developed the NOMINATE procedure to estimate a lowdimensional measure of political ideology in a complex multidimensional political world. NOMINATE is an attempt to estimate
the underlying ideology that drives observed roll-call behavior by
assigning legislators the ideological points that maximize the
number of correctly predicted roll-call votes. The NOMINATE
data have the advantage of including all roll-call votes, not an
arbitrary subset of votes. It also ignores the Representative’s
political party and the legislative issue in question, so it is arguably more exogenous than the ADA scores.17
Second, for each member and each Congress, we construct
our own measure of loyalty to the party leadership using the
individual vote tallies on every issue voted on in the House. For

826

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

V. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
In this section we present our empirical results. Subsection
V.A presents our main results with a simple graphical analysis
that illustrates that changes in electoral strength appears to
affect future voting records entirely because it alters the relative
odds of which party’s nominee will be elected to the House. That
is, candidates do not seem to change their intended policies in
response to large exogenous shocks to electoral strength. This is
followed by more formal estimates of the key parameters of inD
R
D
R
terest: ␥, ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
], and ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
]. Subsection V.B
provides evidence supporting our main identifying assumption—
that among elections that turn out to be close, who wins is “as
good as randomly assigned.” In subsection V.C, we show that our
results do not change substantially when we utilize a number of
alternative voting record indices. Finally, in subsection V.D, we
examine the sensitivity of our results to a functional form as18. The results are nearly identical if one uses the party whip instead of the
party leader.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

this measure, we calculate the percent of a representative’s votes
that agree with the Democrat party leader.18
Third, we use ratings from interest groups other than the
ADA. We include both liberal and conservative ratings from
groups such as the American Civil Liberties Union, the League of
Women Voters, the League of Conservation Voters, the American
Federation of Government Employees, the American Federation
of State, County, Municipal Employees, the American Federation
of Teachers, the AFL-CIO Building and Construction, the United
Auto Workers, the Conservative Coalition, the U. S. Chamber of
Commerce, the American Conservative Union, the Christian Voters Victory Fund, the Christian Voice, Lower Federal Spending,
and Taxation with Representation. Not all the ratings are available in all years, so sample sizes vary when using these alternative ratings.
As we show below, our results are remarkably stable across
alternative measures of roll-call votes. This finding lends some
credibility to the conclusion that our estimates are not driven by
the unique characteristics of one particular measure. See the
Data Appendix for a detailed discussion of our samples and data
sources.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

827

sumption utilized in our base model. The analysis within this
more general framework confirms our findings.

Graphical Analysis. As discussed above, the way to distinguish between full divergence and partial divergence is to analyze
the effects on roll-call votes of an exogenous change in the probability of winning the election. The total effect of such an exogenous change on roll-call behavior (␥) can be split into two compoD
R
nents: the elect component (␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
]) and the affect
D
R
component (␲ 0 [P *t⫹1 ⫺ P *t⫹1 ]). If voters merely “elect” policies
(complete divergence), we should observe little change in the
candidates’ intended policies following an exogenous increase in
D
R
the probability of victory: ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
] should be small. If
voters not only choose politicians, but also affect their policy
choices (partial convergence), candidates should move toward
their bliss points in response to an exogenously higher probability
D
R
of winning: ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
] should be relatively important.
We begin with a simple graphical analysis of ADA scores.
Figure I plots ADA scores at time t ⫹ 1 against the Democrat vote
share at time t. As an example, we are relating the ADA scores for
the representative from, say, the first California district during
the 1995–1996 Congressional session to the Democratic vote
share observed in the 1992 election in that district. In practice,
we use all pairs of adjacent years from 1946 to 1995, except for the
pairs where we cannot link districts due to redistricting (pairs
with years ending with “0” and “2”).
Throughout the paper the unit of observation is the district in
a given year. But to give an overall picture of the data, each point
in Figure I is an average of the ADA score in period t ⫹ 1 within
0.01-wide intervals of the vote share at time t. The vertical line
marks 50 percent of the two-party vote share. Districts to the
right of the vertical line are districts won by Democrats in election t, districts to the left are districts won by Republicans in
election t. The continuous line is the predicted ADA t⫹1 score from
a regression that includes a fourth-order polynomial in vote share
and a dummy for observations above the 50 percent threshold,
and an interaction of the dummy and the polynomial. The dotted
lines represent pointwise 95 percent confidence intervals of this
approximation.
A striking feature of the figure is that ADA scores appear to

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

V.A. Main Empirical Results

828

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

“Affect”

“Elect”

be a continuous and smooth function of vote shares everywhere,
except at the threshold that determines party membership. There
is a large discontinuous jump in ADA scores at the 50 percent
threshold. Compare districts where the Democrat candidate
barely lost in period t (for example, vote share is 49.5 percent),
with districts where the Democrat candidate barely won (for
example, vote share is 50.5 percent). If the regression discontinuity design is valid, the two groups of districts should appear ex
ante similar in every respect— on average. The difference will be
that in one group, the Democrats will be the incumbent for the
next election (t ⫹ 1), and in the other it will be the Republicans.
Districts where the Democrats are the incumbent party for election t ⫹ 1 elect representatives who have much higher ADA
scores, compared with districts where the Republican candidate

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE I
Total Effect of Initial Win on Future ADA Scores: ␥
This figure plots ADA scores after the election at time t ⫹ 1 against the
Democrat vote share, time t. Each circle is the average ADA score within 0.01
intervals of the Democrat vote share. Solid lines are fitted values from fourthorder polynomial regressions on either side of the discontinuity. Dotted lines are
pointwise 95 percent confidence intervals. The discontinuity gap estimates
␥ ⫽ ␲ 0共P *t D⫹1 ⫺ P *t R⫹1兲 ⫹ ␲ 1共P *t D⫹1 ⫺ P *t R⫹1兲.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

829

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

barely won and became the incumbent— on average. The size of
the jump appears to be fairly large, at around twenty ADA points.
What does this discontinuity mean? Formally, the gap is a
credible estimate of the parameter ␥ in equation (4). Intuitively,
it is unsurprising to observe some discontinuity. We know that
party affiliation is an important determinant of roll-call behavior.
We also know that if a Democrat (Republican) is elected in period
t, a Democrat (Republican) is more likely to be elected in period
t ⫹ 1 in the same district, due to the incumbency advantage. The
party effect, together with the electoral advantage of incumbency,
suggests that we should expect to find a gap in Figure I. It is not
surprising to observe that, for example, the 1995–1996 voting
records are more liberal in the districts that were won by Democrats in 1992. The 1995–1996 representative, after all, is more
likely be a Democrat. In Sections II and III we called this parD
ticular mechanism the “elect component,” and denoted it ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺
R
P t⫹1 ].
There is a second component that contributes to ␥. If candidates are constrained by expected voters’ behavior, then a Democrat who is challenging an incumbent Republican (left side of the
graph) would be expected to moderate his intended policies more,
compared with an incumbent Democrat (right side of the graph).
After all, the incumbent would be in a much stronger electoral
position compared with the challenger. This is the other reason
why voting scores should be more liberal where the Democrat is
the incumbent, and hence why there should be a gap in Figure I.
In Sections II and III we labeled this phenomenon “voters affectD
R
ing policies,” and denoted it ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
].
The discontinuity ␥ illustrated in Figure I is equal to
D
R
D
R
␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
] ⫹ ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
]. While it is not surprising
D
R
to find that ␥ ⬎ 0, the real question is whether ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
]
D
R
or ␲ 1 [P t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1 ] dominates. Our empirical strategy is simple.
D
R
We can directly estimate ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
], by separately estimating ␲1, the expected difference in voting between the two parties,
D
R
as well as [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
], the electoral advantage to incumbency.
We can subtract this from the total effect ␥ to determine the
D
R
magnitude of the “affect component” ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
].
In Figure II we illustrate the two elements that make up the
D
R
⫺ P t⫹1
]. The top panel in Figure
elect component, ␲1 and [P t⫹1
II plots ADA scores at time t against the Democrat vote share at
time t. As in Figure I, average ADA scores appear to be a continuous and smooth function of vote shares everywhere, except at

830

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

FIGURE IIb
R
Effect of Initial Win on Winning Next Election: (P D
t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1 )
Top panel plots ADA scores after the election at time t against the Democrat
vote share, time t. Bottom panel plots probability of Democrat victory at t ⫹ 1
against Democrat vote share, time t. See caption of Figure III for more details.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE IIa
Effect of Party Affiliation: ␲1

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

831

19. This regression-discontinuity estimate of the incumbency advantage is
documented in Lee [2001, 2003].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

the threshold that determines party membership. The jump is a
credible estimate of ␲1 in equation (5).
Compare a district where the Democrat candidate barely lost
at time t (for example, vote share of 49.5 percent), with a district
where the Democrat candidate barely won at time t (for example,
vote share of 50.5 percent). Again, if the regression discontinuity
design is valid and has generated random assignment of who
wins in t, then the average voting records of Democrats who are
barely elected will credibly represent, on average, how Democrats
would have voted in the districts that were in actuality, barely
won by Republicans (and vice versa). The observed difference in
voting scores represents a credible estimate of the average policy
differences between the two parties across districts—the direct
influence of party affiliation on voting scores. The difference at
the 50 percent threshold appears quite large, with a gap of about
45 points.
Finally, the bottom panel of Figure II plots estimates of the
probability that the Democrat will win election t ⫹ 1 for a given
Democratic vote share at t. As in the previous cases, the figure
shows a smooth function of vote shares everywhere, except at the
threshold that determines which party won t. The size of the
D
R
jump estimates [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
] in equation (6).19
The discontinuity around the 50 percent threshold indicates
that, for example, districts which barely elected a Democrat in t
are more likely to elect a Democrat in t ⫹ 1, consistent with a
causal incumbency advantage. This is consistent with these districts experiencing exogenous increases in the probability of electing a Democrat (Republican) in 1994.
The total effect ␥, given by the discontinuity in Figure I,
appears to be about twenty ADA points. Figure IIa shows that the
estimate of ␲1 is about 45 points, and Figure IIb shows that
D
R
D
[P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
] is around 0.5. The “elect component” ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺
R
P t⫹1 ] is thus approximately 45 ⫻ 0.5 ⫽ 22.5. The small difference
(20 –22.5) implies that the entire effect of an exogenous change in
electoral strength on future ADA scores is not operating through
how candidates’ policy choices respond to changes in the probability of winning. Instead, the effect is operating through simply
changing the relative odds that a party will retain control over
the seat. That is, this graphical analysis indicates that voters

832

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

RESULTS BASED

ON

TABLE I
ADA SCORES—CLOSE ELECTIONS SAMPLE

Total effect
Variable

Estimated gap

Elect component Affect component
R
D
R
*D
*R
␲1 (PD
t⫹1 ⫺ Pt⫹1) ␲1[(Pt⫹1 ⫺ Pt⫹1)] ␲0[P t ⫹1 ⫺ P t ⫹1]

ADA t⫹1

ADAt

DEMt⫹1

(1)

(2)

(3)

21.2
(1.9)

47.6
(1.3)

0.48
(0.02)

(col. (2)*(col. (3)) (col. (1)) ⫺ (col. (4))
(4)

(5)

22.84
(2.2)

⫺1.64
(2.0)

Standard errors are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a district-congressional session. The
sample includes only observations where the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and
52 percent. The estimated gap is the difference in the average of the relevant variable for observations for
which the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 50 percent and 52 percent and observations for
which the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and 50 percent. Time t and t ⫹ 1 refer
to congressional sessions. ADA t is the adjusted ADA voting score. Higher ADA scores correspond to more
liberal roll-call voting records. Sample size is 915.

primarily elect policies (full divergence) rather than affect policies (partial convergence).
Here we quantify our estimates more precisely. In the analysis that follows, we restrict our attention to “close elections”—
where the Democrat vote share in time t is strictly between 48
and 52 percent. As Figures I and II show, the difference between
barely elected Democrat and Republican districts among these
elections will provide a reasonable approximation to the discontinuity gaps. There are 915 observations, where each observation
is a district-year.20
Table I, column (1), reports the estimated total effect ␥, the
size of the jump in Figure I. Specifically, column (1) shows the
difference in the average ADA t⫹1 for districts for which the
Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 50 percent and
52 percent and districts for which the Democrat vote share at
time t is strictly between 48 percent and 50 percent. The estimated difference is 21.2.
In column (2) we estimate the coefficient ␲1, which is equal to
the size of the jump in Figure IIa. The estimate is the difference
in the average ADA t for districts for which the Democrat vote
20. In 68 percent of cases, the representative in period t ⫹ 1 is the same as
the representative in period t. The distribution of close elections is fairly uniform
across the years. In a typical year there are about 40 close elections. The year with
the smallest number is 1988, with twelve close elections. The year with the largest
number is 1966, with 92 close elections.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

␥

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

833

V.B. Tests for Quasi-Random Assignment
It is important to note that our empirical test crucially relies
on the assumption of random assignment of the winner in close
elections in t. Specifically, the key identifying assumption in our
analysis is that as one compares closer and closer elections, all
predetermined characteristics of Republican and Democratic districts (including the district-specific bliss points) become more
and more similar. If this assumption does not hold, our estimates
are likely to be biased.
Intuitively, this assumption seems to make sense. While
Republican and Democrat districts are likely to be very different
in general, the difference should decline as we examine elections
whereby “pure luck” is a more important determinant of who
wins—in other words, elections that turn out to be won by a tiny

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

share at time t is strictly between 50 percent and 52 percent and
districts for which the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly
between 48 percent and 50 percent. The estimated difference is
47.6.
D
R
⫺ P t⫹1
], which
In column (3) we estimate the quantity [P t⫹1
is equal to the size of the discontinuity documented in Figure IIb.
The estimated jump is 0.48. This indicates that if the Democrat
(Republican) candidate wins a close election in a given district in,
say, 1992, the Democrat (Republican) candidate in the same
district has a 0.48 higher probability of winning in 1994. This is
indeed consistent with the notion that the party that already
holds a seat holds a substantial electoral advantage.
In column (4) we multiply the estimates in columns (2) and
D
R
⫺ P t⫹1
].
(3) to obtain an estimate of the elect component, ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
The product is 22.84, which is not statistically different from the
D
⫺
estimate of ␥ in column (1). Because estimates of ␥ and ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
R
P t⫹1 ] are quite similar, we conclude that the “affect component”
is quite small. In column (5) we subtract the estimate in column
D
R
⫺ P *t⫹1
]. The
(4) from the estimate in column (1) to yield ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
difference is virtually zero.
What is the relative importance of the “elect component”
D
R
D
R
⫺ P t⫹1
], and the “affect component” ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
]?
␲ 1 [P t⫹1
D
R
Our results indicate that ␲ 1 [P t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1 ] overwhelmingly domiD
R
⫺ P *t⫹1
]. Indeed, it entirely explains the overall
nates ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
effect ␥. Below, we show that this is true not only on average, but
also for every decade taken separately.

834

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

21. See Lee [2003] for the conditions under which RD designs can generate
variation in the treatment that is as good as randomized.
22. Data on districts’ characteristics in each election year are from the last
available Census of Population. Because the census takes place every ten years,
standard errors allow for clustering at the district-decade level.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

margin. In the Appendix we provide a formal discussion of this
assumption. Here, we provide two pieces of empirical evidence to
support this assumption.
First, if examining close elections truly provides random
assignment, characteristics determined before time t should be
the same on both sides of the 50 percent threshold— on average.21 We find that as we compare closer and closer elections,
Republican and Democrat districts do have similar observable
characteristics. Consider, for example, geographical location.
There are sizable geographical differences in the entire sample. Averaging over the entire time period, Democrats are
significantly more likely to be elected in the South than in the
North and the West. However, as we start restricting the
sample to closer and closer elections, the geographical differences decrease. For elections that are within only two percentage points from the threshold, the differences are not statistically significant.
This is shown graphically in Figures III and IV, which plot
average district characteristics against Democratic vote share.
Other than geographical location, we consider the following predetermined characteristics: real income, percentage with high
school degree, percentage black, percentage eligible to vote, and
size of the voting population. Generally, the figures indicate that
the difference at the 50 percent threshold is small and statistically insignificant.
Table II illustrates the same point by quantifying the difference between Democrat and Republican districts for a larger set
of characteristics. In particular, we examine all the characteristics shown in Figures III and IV, as well as the fraction of open
seats, percent urban, percent manufacturing employment, and
percent eligible to vote.22 Column (1) includes the entire sample.
Columns (2) to (5) include only districts with Democrat vote share
between 25 percent and 75 percent, 40 percent and 60 percent, 45
percent and 55 percent, and 48 percent and 52 percent, respectively. The model in column (6) is equivalent to Figures III and
IV, since it includes a fourth-order polynomial in Democrat vote

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

835

share. The coefficient reported in column (6) is the predicted
difference at 50 percent. The table confirms that, for many observable characteristics, there is no significant difference in a
close neighborhood of 50 percent. One important exception is the
percentage black, for which the magnitude of the discontinuity is
statistically significant.23
As a consequence, estimates of the coefficients in Table I from
regressions that include these covariates would be expected to
produce similar results—as in a randomized experiment—since

23. This is due to few outliers in the outer part of the vote share range. When
the polynomial is estimated including only districts with vote share between 25
percent and 75 percent, the coefficients becomes insignificant. The gap for percent
urban and open seats, while not statistically significant at the 5 percent level, is
significant at the 10 percent level.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE III
Similarity of Constituents’ Characteristics in Bare Democrat and Republican
Districts–Part 1
Panels refer to (from top left to bottom right) the following district characteristics: real income, percentage with high-school degree, percentage black, percentage eligible to vote. Circles represent the average characteristic within intervals
of 0.01 in Democrat vote share. The continuous line represents the predicted
values from a fourth-order polynomial in vote share fitted separately for points
above and below the 50 percent threshold. The dotted line represents the 95
percent confidence interval.

836

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

all predetermined characteristics appear to be orthogonal to D t .
We have reestimated all the models in Table I conditioning on all
of the district characteristics in Table II, and found estimates
that are virtually identical to the ones in Table I.
As a similar empirical test of our identifying assumption, in
Figure V we plot the ADA scores from the Congressional sessions
that preceded the determination of the Democratic two-party vote
share in election t. Since these past scores have already been
determined by the time of the election, it is yet another predetermined characteristic (just like demographic composition, income
levels, etc.). If the RD design is valid, then we should observe no
discontinuity in these lagged ADA scores—just as we would expect, in a randomized experiment, to see no systematic differences in any variables determined prior to the experiment. The

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE IV
Similarity of Constituents’ Characteristics in Bare Democrat and Republican
Districts—Part 2
Panels refer to (from top left to bottom right) the following district characteristics: voting population, North, South, West. Circles represent the average characteristic within intervals of 0.01 in Democrat vote share. The continuous line
represents the predicted values from a fourth-order polynomial in vote share fitted
separately for points above and below the 50 percent threshold. The dotted line
represents the 95 percent confidence interval.

837

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

DIFFERENCE

IN

TABLE II
DISTRICT CHARACTERISTICS BETWEEN DEMOCRAT
DISTRICTS, BY DISTANCE FROM 50 PERCENT

South
West
Log income
Percentage high-school
grad.
Percentage urban
Percentage black
Manufacturing
employment
Total population
Percentage eligible to
vote
Open seats
Number of
observations

REPUBLICAN

All

⫹/⫺ 25

⫹/⫺ 10

⫹/⫺ 5

⫹/⫺ 2

Polynomial

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

⫺0.211
(0.018)
0.250
(0.015)
⫺0.031
(0.013)
⫺0.086
(0.013)
⫺0.035
(0.003)
0.070
(0.011)
0.082
(0.005)
⫺0.002
(0.001)
⫺1817.9
(3517.3)
0.005
(0.002)
0.070
(0.011)

⫺0.156
(0.019)
0.145
(0.014)
⫺0.012
(0.015)
⫺0.036
(0.012)
⫺0.024
(0.003)
0.065
(0.011)
0.042
(0.004)
0.000
(0.001)
3019.2
(3723.0)
0.010
(0.002)
0.065
(0.011)

⫺0.096
(0.021)
0.093
(0.016)
⫺0.036
(0.020)
0.014
(0.014)
⫺0.008
(0.004)
0.053
(0.012)
0.013
(0.004)
0.004
(0.002)
4961.5
(4562.4)
0.007
(0.003)
0.053
(0.012)

⫺0.054
(0.024)
0.053
(0.019)
⫺0.003
(0.017)
0.026
(0.017)
⫺0.001
(0.004)
0.053
(0.014)
0.003
(0.005)
0.004
(0.002)
3211.4
(5524.2)
0.006
(0.004)
0.053
(0.014)

⫺0.059
(0.036)
0.009
(0.028)
0.001
(0.020)
0.030
(0.026)
0.001
(0.007)
0.056
(0.023)
⫺0.003
(0.009)
0.005
(0.004)
8640.4
(8427.9)
⫺0.003
(0.006)
0.056
(0.023)

⫺0.041
(0.045)
0.015
(0.036)
0.001
(0.036)
0.052
(0.033)
0.008
(0.008)
0.053
(0.028)
⫺0.053
(0.013)
0.003
(0.005)
2007.5
(10483.0)
⫺0.003
(0.007)
0.053
(0.028)

13413

10229

4174

2072

910

13413

Standard errors are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a district-congressional session. Columns
(1) to (5) report the difference in average district characteristics between Democrat and Republican districts.
Column (1) includes the entire sample. Columns (2) to (5) include only districts with Democrat vote share
between 25 percent and 75 percent, 40 percent and 60 percent, 45 percent and 55 percent, and 48 percent and
52 percent, respectively. The model in column (6) includes a fourth-order polynomial in Democrat vote share
that enters separately for vote share above and below 50 percent. The coefficient reported in column (6) is the
predicted difference at 50 percent. All standard errors account for district-decade clustering.

lack of discontinuity in the figure lends further credibility to our
identifying assumption.24
Overall, the evidence strongly supports a valid regression
discontinuity design. And as a consequence, it appears that
among close elections, who wins appears virtually randomly assigned, which is the identifying assumption of our empirical
strategy.

24. The estimated gap is 3.5 (5.6).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

North

AND

838

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

V.C. Sensitivity to Alternative Measures of Voting Records
Our results so far are based on a particular voting index, the
ADA score. In this section we investigate whether our results
generalize to other voting scores. We find that the findings do not
change when we use alternative interest groups scores, or other
summary measures of representatives’ voting records.
Table III is analogous to Table I, but instead of using ADA
scores, it is based on two alternative measures of roll-call voting.
The top panel is based on McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal’s DWNOMINATE scores. The bottom panel is based on the percent of
individual roll-call votes cast that are in agreement with the
Democrat party leader. All the qualitative results obtained using
ADA scores (Table I) hold up using these measures. When we use
the DW-NOMINATE scores, ␥ is ⫺0.36, remarkably close to the
D
R
⫺ P t⫹1
] in column (4), which
corresponding estimate of ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
is ⫺0.34. The estimates are negative here because, unlike ADA
scores, higher Nominate scores correspond to a more conservative
voting record. When we use the measure “percent voting with the
Democrat leader,” ␥ is 0.13, almost indistinguishable from the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE V
Specification Test: Similarity of Historical Voting Patterns between Bare
Democrat and Republican Districts
The panel plots one time lagged ADA scores against the Democrat vote share.
Time t and t ⫺ 1 refer to congressional sessions. Each point is the average lagged
ADA score within intervals of 0.01 in Democrat vote share. The continuous line is
from a fourth-order polynomial in vote share fitted separately for points above and
below the 50 percent threshold. The dotted line is the 95 percent confidence
interval.

839

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

RESULTS BASED

ON

TABLE III
NOMINATE SCORES AND ON PERCENT VOTED LIKE DEMOCRAT
LEADERSHIP—CLOSE ELECTIONS SAMPLE
Total effect
D
R
(P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
)

D
R
␲ 1 [(P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
)]

Variable

Affect component
D
R
␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
]

Z t⫹1

Zt

DEMt⫹1

(col. (2)*(col. (3))

(col. (1)) ⫺ (col. (4))

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

⫺0.58
(0.02)

0.62
(0.04)
⫺0.34
(0.04)

⫺0.02
(0.04)

0.13
(0.02)

0.00
(0.02)

(a) Results based on Nominate scores
Estimated gap
⫺0.36
(0.03)

Elect component

(b) Results based on percent voted like Democrat leadership
Estimated gap
0.13
0.29
0.46
(0.01)
(0.006)
(0.02)

Standard errors are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a district-congressional session. The
sample includes only observations where the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and
52 percent. The estimated gap is the difference in the relevant variable for observations for which the
Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 50 percent and 52 percent and observations for which the
Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and 50 percent. Time t and t ⫹ 1 refer to
congressional sessions. The top panel uses the DW-NOMINATE score constructed by McCarty, Poole, and
Rosenthal. Higher Nominate scores correspond to more conservative roll-call voting records. The bottom
panel uses the percent of a representative’s votes that agree with the Democrat party leader. Sample size is
276 in top panel and 1010 in bottom panel.

D
R
estimate ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
] in column (4), which is 0.13. We show
the graphical analysis for the estimate of ␲1 in Figure VI.
Our empirical findings are also not sensitive to the use of
ratings from various liberal and conservative interest groups.
Liberal interest groups include the American Civil Liberties
Union, the League of Women Voters, the League of Conservation
Voters, the American Federation of Government Employees, the
American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees,
the American Federation of Teachers, the AFL-CIO Building and
Construction, and the United Auto Workers. Conservative groups
include the Conservative Coalition, the U. S. Chamber of Commerce, the American Conservative Union, and the Christian
Voice. All the ratings range from 0 to 100. For liberal groups, low
ratings correspond to conservative roll-call votes, and high ratings correspond to liberal roll-call votes. For conservative groups
the opposite is true.
These alternative ratings yield results that are qualitatively
similar to our findings in Table I and III. Instead of presenting
these results in a table format as we did in Table I and III, we
present the main results in graphical form. We summarize our

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

␲1

␥

840

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE VI
Nominate Scores, by Democrat Vote Share; and Percent Voted with Democrat
Leader, by Democrat Vote Share
The top panel plots DW-Nominate scores at time t against the Democrat vote share
at time t. Circles represent the average Nominate score within intervals of 0.01 in
Democrat vote share. The bottom panel plots the fraction of a Representative’s votes
that agree with the Democrat party leader at time t against the Democrat vote share
at time t. Circles represent the percent voted with Democrat leader within intervals
of 0.01 in Democrat vote share. The continuous line is from a fourth-order polynomial
in vote share fitted separately for points above and below the 50 percent threshold.
The dotted line is the 95 percent confidence interval.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

841

results in Figure VII, where we plot our estimate of ␥ against our
D
R
estimate of ␲ 1 [P t⫹1
⫺ P t⫹1
] for each of these alternative interest
group ratings. The diagonal is the 45° degree line. Most estimates
are on the line or close to the line, indicating again that across a
variety of different interest groups scores, the results are highly
consistent with the full policy divergence hypothesis.25
Our qualitative findings seem insensitive to the choice of
voting score. Representatives’ policy positions, on a wide array of
25. Figures VIII to XI show that the relationship between ratings, and the
democrat vote share shares the same general features as the relationships for
ADA, DW-NOMINATE, and “Percent vote with Democrat Leader.” In all cases, we
find a large discontinuity.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE VII
R
Total Effect [␥] Versus “Elect Policy” Component [␲ 1 (P D
t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1 )], for
Alternative Interest Group Ratings
The figure plots estimates of the Total Effect [␥] on the y-axis against estimates
R
of the “Elect Policy” component [␲ 1 (P D
t⫹1 ⫺ P t⫹1 )] on the x-axis for eleven interest
groups ratings. The line is the 45° line. The closer the total effect is to the “elect
component” effect for an interest group, the closer that group symbol is to the 45°
line. All ratings are between 0 and 100. Higher ratings of liberal interest groups
correspond to more liberal roll-call voting records. Higher ratings of conservative
interest groups correspond to more conservative roll-call voting records.
ACLU is America Civil Liberties Union; LWV is League of Women Voters; LCV
is League of Conservation Voters; AFGE is American Federal Government Employees; AFSCME is American Federation State, County, Municipal Employees;
AFT is American Federation of Teachers; BCTD is AFL-CIO Building and Construction; UAW is United Auto Workers; CC is Conservative Coalition; CCUS is
U. S. Chamber of Commerce; ACU is American Conservative Union.

842

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

issues, do not seem to respond to exogenous changes in electoral
strength. Voters appear to elect, rather than affect, candidates’
platforms.
V.D. Heterogeneity
We now turn to the important issue of heterogeneity. Candidates’ bliss points can be very different across districts or over
time. For example, in any given year, a Democrat from Alabama
is likely to have a bliss point that is quite different from a
Democrat from Massachusetts. Our main results in subsection
V.A are based on a model where candidates’ positions can vary
across districts and years. But one implicit functional form assumption that we adopted was that the difference in policy positions between Democrat and Republican candidates is constant
across districts and over time. This assumption is violated if, for

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE VIII
Liberal Interest Groups Ratings, by Democrat Vote Share—Part 1
The top panel on the left refers to ratings from United Auto Workers. The top
panel on the right refers to ratings from American Federation of Teachers. The
bottom panel on the left refers to ratings from American Federation of Government Employees. The bottom panel on the right refers to ratings from League of
Conservative Voters. Circles represent average ratings within intervals of 0.01 in
Democrat vote share. The continuous line is from a fourth-order polynomial in
vote share fitted separately for points above and below the 50 percent threshold.
The dotted line is the 95 percent confidence interval.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

843

example, the gap in intended policies between Democrats and
Republicans from Alabama is different from the gap between
Democrats and Republicans from Massachusetts.
We show, however, that our findings are robust to a more
general framework that allows for virtually unrestricted heterogeneity in the gap between opposing candidates’ policies across
time and districts. The details can be found in Appendix 3.
Intuitively, we know that the total effect ␥ is partially driven
by the impact of who wins election t on the composition of Democrats and Republicans in office after election t ⫹ 1. In the Appendix we show that it is possible, ex post, to identify the “marginal” districts that switched from Republican to Democrat in t ⫹
1, because the Democrat won in t. By deleting these districts from
the sample, we can examine the impact of an increase in electoral
strength on policy positions, without the confounding effects of
the compositional change (i.e., the “elect component”).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE IX
Liberal Interest Groups Ratings, by Democrat Vote Share—Part 2
The top panel on the left refers to ratings from League of Women Voters. The
top panel on the right refers to ratings from American Civil Liberties Union. The
bottom panel on the left refers to ratings from Taxation with Representation.
Circles represent average ratings within intervals of 0.01 in Democrat vote share.
The continuous line is from a fourth-order polynomial in vote share fitted separately for points above and below the 50 percent threshold. The dotted line is the
95 percent confidence interval.

844

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Our findings using this more general framework indicate
D
R
small estimates of ␲ 0 [P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
]. This implies that our finding
that voters primarily elect policies is not an artifact of a functional form assumption of our basic specification.
We conclude this section considering a different type of heterogeneity: heterogeneity over time. In Table IV we replicate the
estimates in Table I, presenting separate estimates by decade.26
Column (2) shows that the discontinuity estimated by pooling all
the years (Table II, column (2)) masks some variation in the
discontinuity gap across states and years. This is not surprising,
as the political science literature, for example, has noted that in
the South, Democrats and Republicans are ideologically closer
26. Because there are few observations in 1940 and 1990, we merge 1940
with 1950, and 1980 with 1990.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE X
Conservative Interest Groups Ratings, by Democrat Vote Share—Part 1
The top panel on the left refers to ratings from the Lower Federal Spending
Support Score. The top panel on the right refers to ratings from the Conservative
Coalition. The bottom panel on the left refers to ratings from the Chamber of
Commerce. The bottom panel on the right refers to ratings from the Christian
Voters Victory Fund. Circles represent average ratings within intervals of 0.01 in
Democrat vote share. The continuous line is from a fourth-order polynomial in
vote share fitted separately for points above and below the 50 percent threshold.
The dotted line is the 95 percent confidence interval.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

845

than they are in the North. The estimated discontinuity is relatively smaller during the 1970s, and relatively larger during the
1990s. When we stratify by region and decade (not shown), the
discontinuity is relatively smaller in the South in the 1950s and
1970s. Consistent with previous evidence, column (3) shows that
the incumbency advantage has increased over time. The key
findings of the table are in column (5). Notably, the relative
importance of the “elect component” and the “affect component”
remains fairly stable over time. Entries in column (5) indicate
that our findings in Table I hold in each decade from 1940 to
1990.27
27. We have also estimated separate models for presidential election years
and midterm election years. Our results are similar to the ones in Table I. For
example, estimates similar to column (5) for presidential election years and
midterm election years are, respectively, ⫺0.1 (2.8) and ⫺2.5 (3.0).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

FIGURE XI
Conservative Interest Groups Ratings, by Democrat Vote Share—Part 2
The top panel on the left refers to ratings from the American Conservative
Union. The top panel on the right refers to ratings from the Christian Voice. The
bottom panel on the left refers to ratings from the National Taxpayers’ Union.
Circles represent average ratings within intervals of 0.01 in Democrat vote share.
The continuous line is from a fourth-order polynomial in vote share fitted separately for points above and below the 50 percent threshold. The dotted line is the
95 percent confidence interval.

846

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

RESULTS BASED

ON

TABLE IV
ADA SCORES, BY DECADE—CLOSE ELECTIONS SAMPLE

(1)

(2)

Variable
1946–1958

1960–1968

1970–1978

1980–1996

(3)

␥

␲1

ADA t⫹1

ADAt

DEMt⫹1

14.2
(3.2)

41.7
(2.3)

0.41
(0.05)

23.5
(3.5)

11.5
(4.7)

46.8
(3.7)

49.5
(2.7)

46.6
(3.1)

56.6
(2.8)

(4)

(5)

Elect component Affect component
R
D
R
*D
*R
(PD
t⫹1 ⫺ Pt⫹1) ␲1[(Pt⫹1 ⫺ Pt⫹1)] ␲0[P t ⫹1 ⫺ P t ⫹1]
(col. (2)*(col. (3)) (col. (1)) ⫺ (col. (4))

17.0
(4.8)

⫺2.8
(4.0)

25.2
(4.9)

⫺1.7
(4.1)

18.6
(5.1)

⫺7.1
(5.1)

43.0
(4.9)

3.8
(4.5)

0.51
(0.05)

0.40
(0.06)

0.76
(0.05)

Standard errors are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a district-congressional session. The
sample includes only observations where the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and
52 percent. The estimated gap is the difference in the average of the relevant variable for observations for
which the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 50 percent and 52 percent and observations for
which the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and 50 percent. Time t and t ⫹ 1 refer
to congressional sessions. ADA t is the adjusted ADA voting score. Higher ADA scores correspond to more
liberal roll-call voting records. Sample sizes are 322 in 1946 –1958; 245 in 1960 –1968; 183 in 1970 –1978; 164
in 1980 –1996.

VI. RELATION

TO

PREVIOUS EMPIRICAL LITERATURE

A number of empirical studies have directly or indirectly
examined the policy convergence issue.28 Typically, the studies
examine whether party affiliation matters for the observed voting
records of the legislator. Most studies find evidence of this, which
is strictly inconsistent with the complete policy convergence result. For example, Poole and Rosenthal [1984] show that senators
from the same state belonging to different parties have significantly different voting records.
28. An example of early empirical work in this area is Miller and Stokes
[1963]. The literature is too large to be summarized here. Other examples include,
but are not limited to, Snyder and Ting [2001a], Fiorina [1999], Poole and
Rosenthal [2001], Snyder and Ting [2001b], Lott and Davis [1992], Canes-Wrone,
Brady, and Cogan [2002], Krehbiel [2000], Bender [1991], McArthur and Marks
[1988], and McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal [2000].

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Total effect

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

847

VII. CONCLUSION
The arguably central notion of the Downsian paradigm is
that the pressure of electoral competition constrains candidates’
29. See Krehbiel [2000] and McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal [2000] for a
different interpretation of the Snyder and Groseclose results.
30. See Poole and Rosenthal [1997] for an overview.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

More recently, Snyder and Groseclose [2000] estimate the
effect of party affiliation on roll-call votes using an identification
strategy based on the assumption that on votes with 65 percent or
more legislators on one side, legislators are not subject to party
influence. Their main concern is that the correlation between
party affiliation and voting may be spurious, possibly reflecting
legislators’ or constituency preferences. They conclude that in the
majority of cases, party affiliation is a significant determinant of
roll calls.29
We have argued here, however, that evidence against the
(arguably unrealistic) outcome of complete convergence says little
about the relative importance of the broader Downsian notion
that electoral competition pressures politicians to moderate their
positions. An appropriate assessment of this phenomenon rests
on being able to empirically differentiate between partial convergence and complete policy divergence.
Other studies have noted a correlation between the electorate’s and legislator’s ideologies across constituencies and over
time [Levitt 1996; Snyder and Ting 2001a]. This observation does
not constitute evidence that candidates are being forced to deviate from their bliss points (i.e., partial convergence). Since bliss
points are likely to vary across districts within the United States,
this correlation could simply reflect that candidates’ ideologies
may be correlated with those of his fellow citizens in the district.
These correlations suggest that the U. S. Congress may achieve a
modest degree of “representation” across constituencies, in voting
on legislation. Our findings suggest that whatever degree of representation that may arise, it appears not to occur through Downsian competition during a general election.
Our findings are generally consistent with existing evidence
that candidates exhibit ideological rigidity. Many studies have
shown that representatives do not change their positions during
their careers, even when their constituency changes. For example, redistricting does not seem to make much of a difference.30

848

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

policies. This paper finds that voters do not affect policies in this
way, but rather primarily elect policies. The empirical analysis
finds that there is little evidence that members of the U. S. House
alter their positions (in either direction) in response to a large
exogenous change in the probability of winning the election. This
result is unlikely to be spurious or a mere statistical artifact,
because it is derived using a quasi experiment embedded in the
Congressional electoral system that isolates arguably exogenous
variation in the probability of winning the election.
The finding that voters primarily elect policies does not necessarily constitute evidence regarding the overall “representativeness” of members of the U. S. Congress. For example, one can
define “representativeness” as the degree to which a politician
represents the preferences of his/her core supporters. Our analysis would say nothing about this degree of representativeness. In
loose terms, we have no way of knowing whether the Democrat’s
(Republican’s) preferred policy exactly coincides with the mostpreferred policy choice of the “median” Democratic (Republican)
voter. It is possible that electoral competition in the U. S. primary
system can work to force each party’s nominee to represent the
median voter within each party. Instead, our analysis takes candidates’ preferred policies—representative or not—as given, and
asks whether electoral competition in general elections compels
politicians to deviate from those bliss points.
A leading explanation for our findings is that the difficulty of
establishing credible commitments to moderate policies is an
important real-world phenomenon, and dominates any Downsian
convergence effect. This complete divergence hypothesis yields a
very strong prediction—that exogenous changes in the relative
popularity of the candidates has no impact on the candidates’
positions. Our quasi-experimental evidence is consistent with
this bold prediction. Thus, at a minimum, there appears to be
empirical support for the assumption that politicians are unable
to overcome this credibility problem—an assumption that has
been adopted in recent theoretical analyses of representative
democracy (e.g., Besley and Coate [1997, 1998]).
Indeed, if one accepts this interpretation, it suggests the need
for a more nuanced view than the Downsian perspective of how
the American political system translates voters’ preferences into
actual policy. When voters merely “elect” instead of “affect” policies, voters do not influence policy choices as much as they are
presented with choices. Investigating how citizens can affect

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

849

which candidates, and hence which policies appear “on the ballot”
seems to be a useful direction for future empirical research.

1. Derivation of Equation (2)
By definition, we have RC t ⫽ y*(k,␭*,c) ⫹ ( x*(k,␭*,c) ⫺
y*(k,␭*,c)) D t . Both x* and y* depend on k, the Nash bargaining
point ␭* 僆 (0,1) and the bliss point c. Symmetry of the P function
yields a symmetric efficient frontier (around the line y* ⫽ c ⫺
x*). Consider that P *t can take on only two values, P *t D and P *t R
(with P *t D ⬎ P *t R ), corresponding to which party was the incumbent party in election t. Assuming symmetry of the incumbency
advantage, this implies P *t D ⫽ 1 ⫺ P *t R . Given the above symmetries, it follows that the Nash bargains are such that
␭*(P *t D ) ⫽ 1 ⫺ ␭*(P *t R ). Symmetry then implies that x*(k,
␭*(P *t D ), c) ⫺ y*(k, ␭*(P *t D ), c) will be equal to x*(k, ␭*(P *t R ),
c) ⫺ y*(k, ␭*(P *t R ), c), and this gap we can denote, ␲1. Defining
␲ 0 ⬅ [ y*(k, ␭*(P *t D ), c) ⫺ y*(k, ␭*(P *t R ), c)]/[P *t D ⫺ P *t R ], we
obtain
RC t ⫽ constant ⫹ ␲0 P*t ⫹ ␲1 Dt ⫹ εt ,
where we have added a translational shift ε of the entire setup, to
reflect heterogeneity across districts around the “average” district
(the bliss points would be (ε t , c ⫹ ε t )).
2. Random Assignment from Close Elections
Consider the vote share production function for all districts:
(7)
(8)

VS t ⫽ vs共 x*共P *t,ε t兲, y*共P *t,ε t兲, ε t, e t兲
⫽ˆ
vs 共P *t,ε t兲 ⫹ ê t,

where ε t and P *t vary across districts, and ε t represents translational shifts in the parties’ bliss points. e t is an unpredictable
component of the vote share. ˆ
vst is the forecast of the vote share,
which depends on information at the time of the election, and ê t
is the forecast error.
By Bayes Rule, we have
(9)

␾共P *t, ε t兩VS t ⫽ v 0兲 ⫽

f共v 0兩P *t,ε t兲 䡠 g共P *t,ε t兲
,
h共v 0兲

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

APPENDIX 1

850

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

APPENDIX 2: DATA
The election data used in our analysis come from ICPSR
Study 6311, “Elections to the United States House of Representatives, 1898 –1992,” compiled by Gary King [1995]. ICPSR 6311
reports the state, district, incumbency status, and the total votes
received by the Republican and Democrat candidates. ICPSR
6311 has the advantage that King distinguishes between “normal” elections that can be characterized as a Republican running
against a Democrat, with no important independent candidates,
and all other elections labeled as “exceptions.” We drop the 304
“exceptions” between 1946 and 1994 leaving 10,138 observations—roughly 422 observations per congressional session from
1946 to 1992. The 1994 election data were all obtained from the
U. S. House of Representatives’ Office of the Clerk’s Web site.
The Americans for Democratic Action interest group ratings
were taken from Timothy J. Groseclose’s Web site [2002]. As
mentioned in the text, we use “adjusted” ADA scores to be able to
compare ratings across sessions of congress. See Groseclose, Levitt, and Snyder [1999] for a description of the procedure used to
calculate the “adjusted” ADA scores. We replicated the analysis in
the paper with the “nominal” ADA scores and found no qualitative difference in our findings.
Congressional District Data for 1962–1970 were taken from
ICPSR Study 10, “United States Congressional District Data
Books.” Congressional District Data for 1972–1980 were taken
from ICPSR Study 11, “United States Congressional District
Data Book for the Ninety-Third Congress.” Congressional District
31. See DiNardo and Lee [2002] for a similar proof when P *92 and ε have
discrete support, and Lee [2003] for conditions under which an RD design can
generate random assignment of treatment.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

where ␾( 䡠 兩 䡠 ) is the joint density of P *t , ε t conditional on VS t .
f( 䡠 兩 䡠 ) is the density of VS t conditional on P *t and ε t , g⵺ is the
marginal joint density of P *t , ε t and h⵺ is the marginal density of
VS t .
If ê t has continuous density conditional on ˆ
vs, then for a fixed
P *t , ε t , f(v 0 兩P *t ,ε t ) is continuous in v 0 . h(v 0 ) is also continuous in
v 0 , which implies that ␾(P *t ,ε t 兩VS t ⫽ v 0 ) is continuous in v 0 . This
implies that the distribution of P *t , ε t is very nearly the same
between VS t ⫽ 1 ⁄ 2 ⫹ ⌬ and VS t ⫽ 1 ⁄ 2 ⫺ ⌬, for ⌬ small.31

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

851

APPENDIX 3: ADDITIONAL ESTIMATES UNDER UNRESTRICTED
HETEROGENEITY
To see how it is possible to introduce heterogeneity in the
difference between parties’ positions across districts and legislatures, we focus, as before, on districts that experience close elections at time t and assume that the winner in close elections is
random.
Imagine that after election t ⫹ 1, the econometrician can
divide this set of districts into three groups. The first group
(which we call the top group) includes districts that were going to
be Democrat in time t ⫹ 1, irrespective of the outcome at time t.
This group includes the districts that were (exogenously) assigned a Republican representative at time t but become Democrat at time t ⫹ 1. But it also includes districts that were
(exogenously) assigned a Democratic representative at time t,
remained Democrat at time t ⫹ 1, and would have been Democrat at time t ⫹ 1 even if they had been assigned a Republican
winner at time t. In the terminology of Angrist, Imbens, and
Rubin [1996], these districts are “always takers,” because irre-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Data for 1982–1990 were taken from ICPSR Study 8710, “Census
of Population and Housing, 1980 [United States]: STF3D Congressional District-level Extract.” Congressional District Data for
1992 were taken from the 1990 Congressional District level extract. All districts during a given decade were assigned the most
recent census value. For example, 1974 congressional districts
were assigned the 1970 census values.
Keith T. Poole’s [2002] Web site provided much of the data
used in this paper. The non-ADA interest group ratings came
from Poole and Daniels’ [1985] interest group rating data which
contain 59 interest group ratings scores, each covering some or all
of the years between 1959 and 1981. McCarty, Poole, and
Rosenthal’s DW-NOMINATE scores and Poole’s rank ordering
data were also found at Poole’s Web site. For a description of the
NOMINATE procedure, see Poole and Rosenthal [1997], and for a
specific description of the DW-NOMINATE scores see McCarty,
Poole, and Rosenthal [1997] and for a description of the rank
order procedure see Poole [1999].
James Snyder was kind enough to provide us with the Presidential Election returns by Congressional District from 1952 to
1996 for a previous draft of this paper.

852

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

(10)

␥ ⫽ Pr 1␥ 1 ⫹ Pr 2␥ 2 ⫹ Pr 3␥ 3,

where ␥1 is the ␥ for the top group, ␥2 is for ␥ for the middle group,
and ␥3 is the ␥ for the bottom group; and Pr is the relative size of
each group.
If we can identify the three groups, we can provide a test of
complete divergence against partial convergence based on the
size of the group specific ␥s. In particular, we have sharp predictions on the size of ␥1 and ␥3 depending on whether complete
divergence or partial convergence is true.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

spective of the quasi-random assignment of DEM t , they are Democrat at time t ⫹ 1.
It is crucial to remember that even though the econometrician
can identify the districts in this particular group, we maintain the
assumption that all agents in the model cannot. If any party knew
with certainty that it was going to win in t ⫹ 1, irrespective of the
outcome of election t, there would be little incentive to moderate
positions. We emphasize that we are not introducing a new assumption at this point. The assumption that electoral outcomes
are not completely certain (particularly among close elections in
t) provides the basis for Alesina’s theoretical framework, and the
analysis throughout this paper.
In a parallel fashion, we can identify a “bottom group,” which
includes districts that, irrespective of the outcome at time t,
become Republican at time t ⫹ 1. This group includes the districts that were (exogenously) assigned a Democrat representative at time t but are Republican at time t ⫹ 1. It also includes
districts that were (exogenously) assigned a Republican representative at time t, remained Republican after time t ⫹ 1, and would
have been Republican at time t ⫹ 1 even if they had been
assigned to be Democrat at time t. These districts could be called
“never takers” [Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996], because irrespective of the “random assignment” of DEM t , they are Republican at time t ⫹ 1. Again, we can only identify these districts ex
post, from the point of view of the econometrician.
The remaining districts make up the third and final group,
which we call the middle group. In the terminology of Angrist,
Imbens, and Rubin [1996] these districts are the “compliers.”
We can think of the parameter ␥ that we estimated in our
main result section as a weighted average of each group specific
␥:

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

853

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Under complete divergence, we expect the ADA scores of
representatives from both the top and bottom group to be unaffected by who wins the election at time t. This is because, despite
the underlying change in electoral strength, candidates are unable to credibly promise anything but their extreme bliss points.
So it should not matter whether they had a strong or moderate
chance of winning the election in t ⫹ 1.
By contrast, under partial convergence, a Democrat victory
in t should cause ADA scores to rise for the top and bottom
groups. A Democrat victory in t causes an increase in electoral
strength for the Democrats for election t ⫹ 1. With greater
“bargaining power” the compromise would move toward the Democrats’ bliss points.
Essentially, by dividing the districts into these three groups,
we have eliminated the “elect component” when focusing only on
the top and bottom groups. Among the top and bottom groups, the
change in electoral strength will not change the composition of
Democrats and Republicans in office after t ⫹ 1, because we have
deleted the marginal districts (the middle group). Thus, both ␥1
D
and ␥3 are direct estimates of the “affect component” ␲ 0 (P *t⫹1
⫺
R
*
P t⫹1 ).
How do we identify these three groups in practice? In most
contexts, it would be impossible to identify these groups of districts. However, in our context, it is possible because we actually
observe the Democratic vote share, which is the underlying index
that perfectly determines who wins in t ⫹ 1.
To see how this is done, consider elections t and t ⫹ 1. The
“vote production function” is VSt⫹1 ⫽ vs(x*t⫹1(P*t⫹1),y*t⫹1(P*t⫹1),et⫹1),
where VS t⫹1 is the vote share for the Democrats. e is an unpredictable component of the vote share, which must be present if
electoral outcomes are uncertain. Taking a linear approximation
to this function yields (normalizing all coefficients to 1) VS t⫹1 ⫽
P *t⫹1 ⫹ e t⫹1 .
Consider the districts where the Democrat defeated the incumbent Republican party in t ⫹ 1. These are the districts in
R
⫹ e t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 . Next, consider the Democratic
which VS t⫹1 ⫽ P *t⫹1
incumbents who succeeded in t ⫹ 1 who have vote share VS t⫹1 ⫽
D
⫹ e t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 . To make this group comparable, we must
P *t⫹1
select a subset of these districts. That is, we must choose VS t⫹1 ⬎
D
R
1⁄ 2 ⫹ ␪
៮ , where ␪៮ ⫽ (P *t⫹1
⫺ P *t⫹1
). Doing this allows us to focus

854

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Empirical Results with Heterogeneity. We now describe how
to empirically implement the theoretical framework described
above. Our empirical strategy is similar to the one used to obtain
our main results in subsection V.A. As with our basic results, we
include in our analysis only districts that experienced close elections at time t. In these districts we assume again that the winner
party at time t is virtually random. The main difference with our
previous empirical strategy is that we now allow for a more
unrestricted form of heterogeneity across districts and divide our
sample of close elections in three groups.
We begin by showing in Panel A in Table V that in the sample
of close elections, among districts that were won by Democrat in
period t, 72.6 percent remain Democrat in t ⫹ 1, and 27.4 percent
are won by Republicans. Among districts that were won by Republican in period t, 75.9 percent remain Republican in t ⫹ 1,
and 24.1 percent are won by Democrat.
If challengers, who are electorally weaker, are responding to
electoral pressures by moderating their positions, we should see
that a successful Democrat challenger’s ADA score is less liberal
than its comparison group, and that a successful Republican
challengers’ ADA score is more liberal than its comparison group.
Take, for example, the top left corner of panel A. It represents

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

R
on those districts such that P *t⫹1
⫹ e t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 . Intuitively, some
of the districts where the Democratic incumbents won in t ⫹ 1
would not have won if the district had been won by a Republican
in t. This selection procedure eliminates these “marginal”
districts.
Since D t is essentially randomly assigned (among close elections), we have that E[RC t⫹1 兩D 0 ⫽ 1, VS t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 ⫹ ␪៮ ] ⫽
D
R
E[ x *t⫹1 (P *t⫹1
)兩P *t⫹1
⫹ e t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 ] and E[RC t⫹1 兩D 0 ⫽ 0, VS t⫹1 ⬎
R
R
1 ⁄ 2 ] ⫽ E[ x *
*
*t⫹1
(P
)兩P
⫹ e t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 ]. Therefore, the difference
t⫹1
t⫹1
D
R
in these quantities is E[ x *t⫹1 (P *t⫹1
) ⫺ x *t⫹1 (P *t⫹1
)兩D t ⫽ 0, D t⫹1 ⫽
1]. This is the response of Democrats’ policy choice to differing
D
R
probabilities of winning t ⫹ 1, P *t⫹1
and P *t⫹1
.
How do we practically choose this higher cutoff ␪៮ ? We observe
R
the proportion of the D t ⫽ 0 group of districts that have P *t⫹1
⫹
e t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 . This proportion is ⌳ ⬅ Pr[D t⫹1 ⫽ 1兩D t ⫽ 0]. Now
consider the D t ⫽ 1 group of districts. If D t is randomly assigned,
then we must choose ␪៮ so that Pr[VS t⫹1 ⬎ 1 ⁄ 2 ⫹ ␪៮ 兩D t ⫽ 1] ⫽ ⌳.
This can be done since VS t⫹1 is perfectly observable.

855

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?
TABLE V
ADDITIONAL ESTIMATES USING ADA SCORES—CLOSE ELECTIONS SAMPLE
Districts, where
DEM t ⫽ 1
(2)

Percent DEM t⫹1 ⫽ 1
Percent DEM t⫹1 ⫽ 0
Total

24.1
75.9
100

72.6
27.4
100

Panel B

Districts in
top group
Districts in
middle group
Districts in
bottom group

(3)

Average ADA t⫹1
in districts,
where
DEM t ⫽ 0
(1)

Average ADA t⫹1
in districts,
where
DEM t ⫽ 1
(2)

Difference in
average ADA t⫹1
(col. (2))
⫺ (col. (1))
(3)

67.6
(3.0)
18.6
(1.7)
21.1
(2.2)

65.9
(2.9)
66.1
(1.8)
16.5
(2.1)

⫺1.7
(3.0)
47.4
(1.8)
⫺4.6
(2.3)

(4)

Obs.
(4)
224
441
250

Standard errors are in parentheses. The unit of observation is a district-congressional session. The
sample includes only observations where the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between 48 percent and
52 percent. Column (1) refers to observations for which the Democrat vote share at time t is strictly between
48 percent and 50 percent. Column (2) refers to observations for which the Democrat vote share at time t is
strictly between 50 percent and 52 percent. Time t and t ⫹ 1 refer to congressional sessions. Higher ADA
scores correspond to more liberal roll-call voting records.

Democrats who were able to win the district even though it was
held by a Republican. We would like to compare the voting score
of those districts with the voting score of otherwise comparable
districts where the Democrat party is the incumbent party, and
the candidate from the Democrat party was elected at time t.
The empirical challenge is to identify the correct counterfactual. The methodology described above provides a solution and
leads us to split the districts into three groups, as shown in Panel
B. We empirically identify the three groups as follows. As before,
we consider only the 915 observations that experience close elections at time t. We include in the top group of districts where a
Republican (barely) won at time t but a Democrat regained the
district at time t ⫹ 1 as well as the districts with the largest
Democrat vote shares at time t ⫹ 1, among the districts where a
Democrat won at time t. Specifically, we included the top 24.1

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Panel A

Districts, where
DEM t ⫽ 0
(1)

856

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

percent districts with the largest Democrat vote share among the
districts where a Democrat won at time t. There are 224 such
districts.
Similarly, we include in the bottom group districts where a
Democrat (barely) won at time t but a Republican regained the
district at time t ⫹ 1, as well as districts with the largest
Republican vote shares at time t ⫹ 1, among the districts where
a Republican won at time t. Specifically, we included the 27.4
percent districts with the largest Republican vote share, since
among all the districts where the Republican lost at time t, the
Republican candidate won at time t ⫹ 1 in 27.4 percent of the
cases. There are 250 such districts. Finally, we include in the
middle group the remaining districts. There are 441 such
districts.
Because of the way we constructed the three groups, none of
the top group districts in column (1) has a representative in
period t ⫹ 1 who is the same representative in period t. On the
contrary, 91 percent of the top group districts in column (2) has a
representative in period t ⫹ 1 who is the same representative in
period t. The corresponding figures for the bottom group are,
respectively, 0 and 96 percent. The corresponding figures for the
middle group are 90 percent and 89 percent.
Panel B shows the average voting scores, for each of the
three groups, by the winning party at time t. In column (1) we
report the average ADA at time t ⫹ 1 for districts that were
Republican at time t for each of the three groups. In column (2)
we report the average ADA score at time t ⫹ 1 for districts that
were Democrat at time t. In column (3) we report the
difference.
Consider the top and the bottom group. Consistent with the
hypothesis of complete divergence, there is virtually no difference
in the voting scores of the two sets of districts. Consider the
middle group. As expected, there is a large difference in the
voting scores of the two sets of districts.
Overall, the results in Table V lead us to conclude that our
earlier results are robust to a more general framework that
allows for unrestricted heterogeneity in the differences in policy positions across districts and over time. Finally, we have
estimated similar models using alternative measures of rollcall behavior (DW-Nominate scores and percentage of vote
consistent with Democrat leadership). In results available

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

857

from the authors, we find similar results: virtually no response
of voting records to changes in electoral strength.

REFERENCES
Alesina, Alberto, “Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System with
Rational Voters,” American Economic Review, LXXVIII (1988), 796 – 805.
Alesina, Alberto, and Stephen E. Spear, “An Overlapping Generations Model of
Electoral Competition,” Journal of Public Economics, XXXVII (1988), 359 –379.
Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin, “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, XCI (1996), 444 – 445.
Banks, Jeffrey S., and D. Roderick Kiewiet, “Explaining Patterns of Candidate
Competition in Congressional Elections,” American Journal of Political Science, XXXIII (1989), 997–1015.
Bernhardt, Daniel, and Daniel Ingberman, “Candidate Reputation and the Incumbency Effect,” Journal of Public Economics, XXVII (1985), 47– 67.
Bender, Bruce A., “The Influence of Ideology on Congressional Voting,” Economic
Inquiry, XXIX (1991), 416 – 428.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate, “An Economic Model of Representative
Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 85–114.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate, “Sources of Inefficiency in a Representative
Democracy: A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, LXXXVIII
(1998), 139 –156.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case, “Political Institutions and Policy Outcomes,”
Journal of Economic Literature, XLI (2003), 7–73.
Calvert, Randall L., “Robustness of the Multidimensional Voting Model: Candidate Motivations, Uncertainty, and Convergence,” American Journal of Political Science, XXIX (1985), 69 –95.
Canes-Worne, Brandace, David W. Brady, and John F. Cogan, “Out of Step, Out
of Office: Electoral Accountability and House Members’ Voting,” American
Political Science Review, XCVI (2002), 127–140.
DiNardo, John, and David S. Lee, “The Impact of Unionization on Establishment
Closure: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Representation Elections,”
NBER Working Paper No. 8993, June 2002.
Downs, Anthony, An Economic Theory of Democracy (New York, NY: Harper and
Row, 1957).
Fiorina, Morris P., “Whatever Happened to the Median Voter?” paper prepared for
the MIT conference on Parties and Congress, Cambridge, MA, October 2,
1999.
Groseclose, Timothy J., ADA SCORES, 1947–1999 [Computer File]. http://
faculty-gsb.stanford.edu/groseclose/archive.htm 12 February 2002.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, and Carroll McKibbin, ROSTER OF UNITED STATES CONGRESSIONAL OFFICEHOLDERS AND BIOGRAPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MEMBERS OF THE
UNITED STATES CONGRESS, 1789 –1996: MERGED DATA [Computer
file], 10th ICPSR ed., Ann Arbor, MI, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer and distributor], 1997.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, UNITED STATES
CONGRESSIONAL ROLL CALL VOTING RECORDS, 1789 –1990 [Parts
1–202] [Computer file], ICPSR ed., Ann Arbor, MI, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer and distributor], 2001.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY, AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY, AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY

858

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, and Congressional
Quarterly, Inc., UNITED STATES CONGRESSIONAL ROLL CALL VOTING
RECORDS, 1789 –1994 [Parts 203–206] [Computer file], ICPSR ed., Ann Arbor,
MI, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research/Washington,
DC, Congressional Quarterly, Inc. [producers], 1997, Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1997.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, and Congressional
Quarterly, Inc., UNITED STATES CONGRESSIONAL ROLL CALL VOTING
RECORDS, 1789 –1996 [Parts 207–208] [Computer file], ICPSR ed., Ann Arbor,
MI, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research/Washington,
DC, Congressional Quarterly, Inc. [producers], 1998, Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1998.
King, Gary, ELECTIONS TO THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 1898 –1992 [Computer file]. ICPSR version, Cambridge, MA, Gary
King [producer], 1994, Ann Arbor, MI, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1995.
Krehbiel, Keith, “The Coefficient of Party Influence,” Stanford Graduate School of
Business Research Paper No. 1646, 2000.
Lee, David S., “The Electoral Advantage to Incumbency and Voters’ Valuation of
Politicians’ Experience: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Close Elections,” University of California, Berkeley Center for Labor Economics, Working Paper No. 31, April 2001.
——, “Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U. S. House
Elections,” University of California, Berkeley manuscript, September 2003.
Levitt, Steven D., “How Do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter
Preferences, Party Affiliation, and Senator Ideology,” American Economic
Review, LXXXVI (1996), 425– 441.
Levitt, Steven D., Timothy Groseclose, and James M. Snyder, Jr., “Comparing
Interest Group Scores across Time and Chambers: Adjusted ADA Scores for
the U. S. Congress,” American Political Science Review, XCIII (1999), 33–50.
Lott, John, and Michael Davis, “A Critical Review and Extension of the Political
Shirking Literature,” Public Choice, LXXIV (1992), 461– 484.
McArthur, John R., and Stephen V. Marks, “Constituent Interests versus Legislator Ideology: The Role of Political Opportunity Cost,” Economic Inquiry,
XXVI (1988), 461– 470.
McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal, Income Redistribution
and the Realignment of American Politics (Washington, DC: The AEI Press
(1997).
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal, “The Hunt for Party
Discipline in Congress,” American Political Science Review, XCV (2000),
673– 687.
Miller, Warren E., and Donald E. Stokes, “Constituency Influence in Congress,”
American Political Science Review, LVII (1963), 45–56.
Osborne, Martin J., “Spatial Models of Political Competition under Plurality Rule:
A Survey of Some Explanations of the Number of Candidates and the Position
they Take,” Canadian Journal of Economics, XXVIII (1995), 261–301.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, Political Economics (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2000).
Poole, Keith T., “Changing Minds? Not in Congress!” GSIA WP No. 1997-22, in
Changing Minds, Michael Munger and Bryan Roberts, eds. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
——, DW-NOMINATE SCORES FOR HOUSE, 1st–106th SESSION OF CONGRESS [Computer File]. http://voteview.uh.edu/default_nomdata.htm, 2002.
——, INTEREST GROUP RATINGS, 1959 –1981 [Computer File]. http://
voteview.uh.edu/dwnominate.htm, 2002.
——, RANK ORDER FOR THE HOUSE, 1947–1996 [Computer File]. http://
voteview.uh.edu/default_nomdata.htm, 2002.
Poole, Keith T., and R. Steven Daniels, “Ideology, Party and Voting in the U. S.
Congress 1959 –1980,” American Political Science Review, LXXIX (1985),
373–399.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal, “The Polarization of American Politics,”
Journal of Politics, XLVI (1984), 102–131.

DO VOTERS AFFECT OR ELECT POLICIES?

859

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/119/3/807/1938834 by guest on 18 October 2019

Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal, “A Spatial Model for Roll Call Analysis,”
American Journal of Political Science, XXIX (1985), 331–347.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal, “Patterns of Congressional Voting,”
American Journal of Political Science, XXXV (1991), 331–347.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal, Congress: A Political-Economic History of
Roll Call Voting (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal, “D-Nominate after 10 Years,” Legislative
Studies Quarterly, XXVI (2001), 5–30.
Snyder, James, and Timothy Groseclose, “Estimating Party Influence in Congressional Roll-Call Voting,” American Journal of Political Science, XLIV (2000),
187–205.
James Snyder, and Michael Ting, “Party Labels, Roll-Call Votes, and Elections,”
mimeo, 2001a.
James Snyder, and Michael Ting, “An Information Rational for Political Parties,”
mimeo, 2001b.
U. S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING, 1980 [UNITED STATES]: SUMMARY TAPE FILE
3D CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT-LEVEL EXTRACT [Computer file]. Milwaukee, WI: John McAdams, Marquette University [producer], 198?. Ann
Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 1987.
——, CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING, 1990 [UNITED STATES]:
SUMMARY TAPE FILE 3D CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS OF THE
UNITED STATES, 103RD CONGRESS [Computer File]. Washington, DC,
1993.
——, UNITED STATES CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT DATA BOOKS, 1961–
1965 [Computer file]. ICPSR ed., Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research [producer and distributor], 196?.
——, UNITED STATES CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT DATA BOOK FOR THE
NINETY-THIRD CONGRESS, 1973 [Computer file]. ICPSR ed., Ann Arbor,
MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer
and distributor], 1999.
Wittman, Donald, “Candidate Motivation: A Synthesis of Alternative Theories,”
American Political Science Review, LXXVII (1983), 142–157.

