American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (January 2011): 224–238
http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/app.3.1.224

Was There Really a Hawthorne Effect at the
Hawthorne Plant? An Analysis of the
Original Illumination Experiments†
By Steven D. Levitt and John A. List*
The “Hawthorne effect” draws its name from a landmark set of
studies conducted at the Hawthorne plant in the 1920s. The data
from the first and most influential of these studies, the “Illumination
Experiment,” were never formally analyzed and were thought
to have been destroyed. Our research has uncovered these data.
Existing descriptions of supposedly remarkable data patterns prove
to be entirely fictional. We do find more subtle manifestations of
possible Hawthorne effects. We also propose a new means of testing for Hawthorne effects based on excess responsiveness to experimenter-induced variations relative to naturally occurring variation.
(JEL C90, J24, J28, M12, M54, N32)

The experiments started with, continued with, and ended with attention
focused on one thing and one thing only, what people do. This was the
new procedure and it was revolutionary, in the same way that Galileo’s or
Mendel’s procedure was revolutionary in the science of their time.
——C. W. M. Hart (1943)

W

hen the National Research Council initiated a set of experiments at Western
Electric’s Hawthorne Plant in Cicero, IL in 1924, its objective was to answer
a narrow question: does better lighting enhance worker productivity? The results
of these experiments, however, have had a profound influence on research in the
social sciences ever since. According to Ann B. Blalock and Hubert M. Blalock
(1982, 72), to the surprise of the researchers, “each time a change was made, worker
productivity increased … . As a final check, the experimenters returned to the original unfavorable conditions of poor lighting … . Seemingly perversely, productivity
continued to rise.” Spurred by these initial findings, a series of experiments were
conducted at the plant over the next nine years. New empirical results reinforced the
initial findings. Jonathan Freedman, David O. Sears, and J. Merrill Carlsmith (1981,

* Levitt: Department of Economics, University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th St., Chicago, IL 60637, and National
Bureau of Economic Research (e-mail: slevitt@uchicago.edu); List: Department of Economics, University of
Chicago, 1126 E. 59th St., Chicago, IL 60637, and National Bureau of Economic Research (e-mail: jlist@uchicago.
edu).Thanks to Sonia Jaffe, Andrew Hogue, and Colin Spitz for outstanding research assistance. Marc Nerlove, Joel
Sobel, Charles Wrege, and three anonymous referees provided invaluable comments and suggestions. Financial
support came from the National Science Foundation and the Sherman Shapiro Research Fund.
†
To comment on this article in the online discussion forum, or to view additional materials, visit the article page
at http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/app.3.1.224.
224

Vol. 3 No. 1

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

225

49) summarize the results of the next round of experiments as follows: “Regardless
of the conditions, whether there were more or fewer rest periods, longer or shorter
workdays … the women worked harder and more efficiently.”
From these experiments, emerged the concept of the “Hawthorne effect,” which
is defined very broadly by the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) as meaning “an
improvement in the performance of workers resulting from a change in their working conditions, and caused either by their response to innovation or by the feeling
that they are being accorded some attention.” These experiments are now recognized as some of the most influential in social science, helping to spawn (along with
Frederick Taylor’s 1911 The Principles of Scientific Management) the development
of a new field of study—industrial psychology—and still influencing experimental
research design today. As Milton Bloombaum (1983) notes, “In the history of science, certain contributions stand out as signal events in the sense that they influence
a great deal of what follows. The Hawthorne Experiments exemplify this phenomenon in the field of industrial work … . ”1
Although economists have historically devoted less attention to the Hawthorne
effect than psychologists, this has begun to change as the use of randomization
has become more prominent within the discipline (see, e.g., Esther Duflo, Rachel
Glennerster, and Michael Kremer (2008) within the development context and List
(2006) more generally). Within this line of research, issues such as randomization
bias and effects of scrutiny remain of utmost importance when interpreting treatment effects. James J. Heckman (1991) provides a good discussion of the evidence
on randomization bias, and Levitt and List (2007) point to the increased scrutiny
associated with participation in laboratory and social experiments as one of the
greatest threats to the generalizability of such studies. Economists are also beginning to explore the closely related issue of placebo effects (see, e.g., Anup Malani
2006).
Despite the prominence of the original Hawthorne experiments, when scholars
have later re-analyzed the data, the results have not been as clear-cut as the original
researchers claimed. Richard Herbert Franke and James D. Kaul (1978) were the
first to carefully analyze data from what is known as the “first relay” experiment
at Hawthorne, concluding that most of the variation in production rates could be
explained by differences in variables such as managerial discipline and the amount
of employee rest. Consequently, there was relatively little scope for “unmeasured
changes in the human relations of workers.” Jones (1992), again focusing on data
from the first relay experiment, attempts to more directly measure the magnitude
of any Hawthorne effects. He finds no evidence, either in the raw data or after controlling for other factors, to support the traditional interpretation of the Hawthorne
data.2
The effect, of course, has gone well beyond academic circles, as noted in Stephen R. G. Jones (1992), Thomas
J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman, Jr. (1982, 5–6) write: “For us, the very important message of the research … is
that it is attention to employees, not work conditions per se, that has the dominant impact on productivity. (Many
of our best companies, one friend observed, seem to reduce management to merely creating ‘an endless stream of
Hawthorne effects’).”
2
Although it should be noted that Bloombaum (1983) challenged many of Franke and Kaul’s (1978) conclusions. See Michiel A. J. Kompier (2006) for a discussion of why the mythology surrounding the original Hawthorne
experiments has been so persistent.
1

226

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011

Unlike the first relay experiments, no statistical analysis has ever been performed
on the original illumination studies at Hawthorne, which predate the relay experiments that are the focus of Franke and Kaul (1978) and Jones (1992). It is the
illumination studies that are the genesis of the popular claims that whenever light
was manipulated, whether upward or downward, output increased. For example,
Franke and Kaul (1978, 624) describe popular views of the data as showing that:
“Inexplicably worker output … increased regardless of increase or decrease in illumination.” Similarly, Blalock and Blalock (1982, 72) report that “each time a change
was made, worker productivity increased … . As a final check, the experimenters
returned to the original unfavorable conditions of poor lighting … . Seemingly perversely, productivity continued to rise.” Interestingly, these statements have become
urban legend and difficult to test because the illumination data are broadly believed
to have been destroyed.3
In this paper, we provide the first statistical analysis of these nearly 90 year old
data. We were able to locate microfilm relating to the illumination experiments in
collections at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Baker Library at Harvard
Business School. Our search for the original data was triggered by a sentence in
Franke and Kaul’s (1978) appendix that mentioned the University of WisconsinMilwaukee data archive and an index created by the reference librarians (Stanley
Mallach and Steven Smith 1977). Indeed, going through that archive we found a
number of documents relating to the illumination studies, including a graphical
depiction of one room’s data from the original illumination experiments, which
appear to represent the means by which the data were originally recorded by the
researchers. Further searching led us to the Baker Library at Harvard University,
which contained graphical records for two additional rooms. These three data series
are the basis of our empirical analysis. To the best of our knowledge, these illumination data have never previously been coded and statistically examined.4
Our analysis of the newly found data reveals little evidence in favor of a
Hawthorne effect as commonly described, i.e., productivity rising whenever light is
manipulated. A naïve reading of the raw data does produce such a pattern, however.
This is only because all lighting changes occurred on Sundays, the only off day
for workers. The empirical fact is that productivity is higher on Mondays than on
Fridays and Saturdays. Output on Mondays is equally high, however, whether or not
a lighting change occurs on that particular Monday. Thus, researchers seemingly
misinterpreted the day of week effect with the Hawthorne effect.
We do uncover some weak evidence consistent with more subtle manifestations
of Hawthorne effects in the data. First, productivity increases in the areas that were
part of the experiments were much greater than for the plant overall. Second, out3
Berkeley Rice (1982) laments this fact by noting that “the original [illumination] research data somehow disappeared.” E. A. M. Gale (2004, 439) reinforces this notion by stating that “these particular experiments were never
written up, the original study reports were lost, and the only contemporary account of them derives from a few
paragraphs in a trade journal.” Richard Gillespie (1991, 46–47) speculates that the reason the experiments were not
written up was due to the fact that the findings did not assuage industry: “the final report would have recommended
a basic lighting level of 7 to 10 foot candles … (which) … clearly failed to satisfy the electrical industry’s expectations that the research would provide the scientific justification … for higher levels of illumination.”
4
The illumination data were presented graphically. We extracted the information from the graphs and placed it
into spreadsheet form. The raw data for all variables used in this analysis are available upon request.

Vol. 3 No. 1

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

227

put tended to be higher when experimental manipulations were ongoing relative
to when there was no experimentation. Finally, productivity is more responsive to
experimenter manipulations of light than naturally occurring fluctuations, consistent
with the idea that it was not the light itself, but rather the manipulation of the light
that mattered. Ultimately, however, the poor research design of the Hawthorne illumination treatments limits what can be learned.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section I provides a framework for
thinking about the disparate definitions of the Hawthorne effect that are sometimes observed in the literature. Section II provides background on the illumination
experiments conducted at the Hawthorne plant between 1924 and 1927. Section
III provides the first rigorous analysis of the data generated by these illumination
experiments. Section IV concludes.
I. What Do Researchers Mean When They Refer to a Hawthorne Effect?

One of the difficulties associated with testing for Hawthorne effects is the absence
of a precise definition of the Hawthorne effect.5 In this section, we outline the various possible manifestations of a Hawthorne effect.6 For the purposes of explication,
we will assume that the setting being analyzed is a randomized experiment where
the nature of the experimental variation is increases or decreases in light.
There are at least three channels through which a Hawthorne effect might arise.
The first channel is via the scrutiny and emphasis on process accompanying experimentation (e.g., signing of release forms, reading of instructions, etc.). With this
channel, it is participation in the experiment, rather than the experimental manipulation itself (i.e., the increased or decreased light), that is affecting behavior. If this
is the case and the same degree of scrutiny is given to the treatment and control
groups, then such an effect would appear as a uniform increase in output across both
treatment and control groups. To address this type of effect, researchers sometimes
use two sets of control groups: a so-called “Hawthorne control group” that does
not receive treatment, but mirrors the treatment group with respect to the levels
of attention that are devoted to them and are made equally aware of experimental participation, as well as a second control group that is unaware that they are
being experimented upon (e.g., John G. Adair, Donald Sharpe, and Cam-Loi Huynh
1989). Any differences in output between the “Hawthorne control group” and the
other control group are attributed to a Hawthorne effect.
A second (but not mutually exclusive) source of the Hawthorne effect is driven by
the experimental treatment itself. In our example, for instance, the repeated manipulation of lighting levels over time might provide reminders to the treatment group
(but not to either the “Hawthorne control group” or the other control group) that
they are under observation. Under this scenario, one might expect to observe spikes
5
As evidence on this point, The Merriam-Webster dictionary offers a very different definition for a Hawthorne
effect than the one cited in the OED: “the stimulation to output or accomplishment that results from the mere fact
of being under observation.” Along the lines of this second definition, is the use of so-called “Hawthorne control
groups” in randomized trials in addition to the standard treatment and control groups.
6
An earlier version of this paper presents a mathematical formalization of the ideas discussed in this section.
This formalization is available upon request.

228

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011

in output for the treatment group in response to each adjustment in lighting levels.
This is the pattern described in the popular accounts of the illumination studies.
Note that use of a “Hawthorne control group” may not completely capture this channel of the Hawthorne effect.
A third version of the Hawthorne effect can arise as a result of so-called “experimenter demand effects” whereby experimental subjects attempt to act in ways that
will please the experimenter (Levitt and List 2007). If workers think that the experimenters wish to show that greater lighting increases output, the response of output
to artificial, experimenter-induced variation in light is likely to be more exaggerated
than the response to natural variation in light due, say, to weather conditions or the
change of seasons. A simple experimental design with a treatment group, a control
group, and a “Hawthorne control group” will, in this case, generate experimental
estimates that exaggerate the true impact of naturally occurring changes in light.
Further complicating the empirical estimation of the Hawthorne effect is that,
from a theoretical perspective, it is unclear whether the Hawthorne effect is a shortrun or long-run phenomenon. Experimental manipulation may increase output in
the short run, with productivity levels returning back to normal levels as workers
habituate (see, e.g., Uri Gneezy and List 2006). Alternatively, if the productivity
increases are due to process improvements, the effect of a one-time experiment may
be long-lived.
As the preceding paragraphs make clear, Hawthorne effects may appear in different forms, ranging from short-run spikes associated with changes in treatment to
long-run improvements for those participating in the experiments to excess sensitivity to variation that is experimentally induced. In our empirical work, we explore
these manifestations.
II. Experimentation at the Hawthorne Plant

The illumination experiments were carried out at the Western Electric Company’s
“Hawthorne Works” factory located in the Chicago suburbs. Western Electric dispatched two engineers, George Pennock and Clarence Stoll to the Hawthorne
plant from 1924 to1927 to oversee the experiments (Gale 2004). Charles Snow, a
Massachusetts Institute of Technology instructor, assumed day-to-day responsibility
for carrying out the experiments.
These experiments, which are summarized in Figure 1, are known as the “illumination experiments” because they varied the amount of light in the workplace
to study how such variation influenced productivity. Figure 1 provides a timeline
summarizing the various phases of the illumination experiments, noting for each
department the periods during which light was varied experimentally, as well as the
periods when output was recorded. Workers in these three departments were women
who primarily assembled relays or wound coils of wire, and their output was measured as units completed per unit of time.
As Figure 1 shows, the first wave of the experiment lasted from November 1924
through April 1925 and involved all three departments. During the summer months
there was ample natural light and light recording (and manipulation) was suspended,
although output continued to be reported in all three departments. After the summer

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

Vol. 3 No. 1

229

Room 1

Room 2

Room 3

Output recorded

7
ct
.1
92
O

7
19
2
ril
Ap

Ju
ly
Se 19
pt 26
.1
92
6

6
Fe
b.
19
2

Au
Se g. 1
pt 92
.1 5
92
5

5
il
19
2
Ap
r

N
ov
.1
92

4

Light manipulated

Figure 1. Timeline of the Illumination Experiments
Notes: The illumination experiments took place sporadically between November 1924 and October 1927. Three
separate rooms of employees participated. The lighter lines in the figure denote, by room, the time periods when
active experimentation was taking place. The darker lines report time periods when output was recorded.

ended there was a period of time during which no data were recorded (not even
output). In February 1926, light manipulation experiments resumed, but only in one
of the three rooms. Although there was no experimentation, output was recorded in
the other two rooms through the end of the summer of 1926. The fall of 1926 saw
continued lighting experiments in the first room, but data from the other two rooms
were no longer reported. The experiments culminated with the most radical experimental manipulations: workers in the first room were dispatched to a room where
the windows were blackened and burlap covered the sky lights in order to achieve
more precise control over lighting conditions. (see Elton Mayo 1933, 55–56 or F. J.
Roethlisberger and William J. Dickson 1939, 14–18). April 1927 marked the end of
the illumination experiments, although researchers continued to monitor output in
the first room through October 1927.7
III. Illumination Data

The illumination experiments summarized in Figure 1 provide a wealth of data
and exogenous variation. For example, Figure 2 shows how light varied over time
in Room 1, where the primary experimental manipulation of illumination occurred.
Figure 2 reports both the average levels of natural and artificial light over time.
Natural light varies with the seasons and is not manipulated by the experimenters,
except at the end of the study when the windows were blackened so there was no
natural light. The original lighting system in place at the beginning of the experiments provided four foot candles of artificial light which was supplemented with
7
Following on the heels of the illumination studies, a series of further experiments were undertaken. Western
Electric brought in academic consultants, most prominently Mayo, in 1928. Experiments were carried out on workers whose jobs were to make relays, split mica, and assemble telephones. The experiments lasted until June 1932,
when the women in the test room received their notices due to the poor economy (except the most exceptional
worker, Jennie Sirchio, who worked in the office for a few months before being let go (Gale 2004)). This second
series of experiments provided a wealth of data, summarized in Mayo (1933).

230

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011

Light level in foot-candles

40
Natural light
Artificial light

30
No light

20

No light

data

data

recorded

recorded

10

0

Apr

25

il 19

26
26
. 19 l 19
Feb Apri

26

t. 19

Sep

Apr

27

il 19

Figure 2. Variation in Artificial and Natural Light during the Illumination Experiments
in the Primary Experiment Room
Notes: The work rooms were illuminated by both natural and artificial light. Fluctuations in artificial light represent
experimental manipulations. Prior to September 1926, all variation in natural light was due to seasonal patterns;
after September 1926, the windows were blackened and only artifical light was present.

natural light. The first year of light manipulation ranged from this baseline level up
to 36 foot candles of artificial light. The second year’s experiments used the same
range of variation of artificial light, but the third year’s experiments differed in that
all natural light was eliminated.8 In this last period, the experimenters started with
11.5 foot candles of artificial light and incrementally lowered light until it reached
only 1.4 foot candles (for just one day) before being increased to 11 foot candles.
The illumination experiments ended shortly thereafter.
For experimental purposes, all lighting changes commenced on Monday, so that
facility employees would have ample time to alter the lighting arrangements on
Sunday, which was the only day of the week that the factory was not in operation.
According to Gillespie (1991), at the start of each new experimental period workers were made aware of the experimental changes. Of course, as discussed above,
this very warning can have important effects on worker effort. Output is measured
by room. There is neither recorded information on worker characteristics nor on the
productivity of individual workers.9
A. Short-run Output Fluctuations as Evidence for a Hawthorne Effect
It is commonly asserted that output increased immediately in response to experimental manipulation of the work environment, regardless of whether light was
8
As C. E. Snow writes in his unpublished report on the third year’s illumination experiments, “This test differed
from the two preceding tests.…The illumination supplied to the operatives was artificial only, while previously a
mix of artificial and natural illumination had been used.…Close control of illumination intensity had always been
unattainable in our previous tests due to unavoidable variation in natural illumination” (Snow 1927). In private
correspondence, Charles Wrege also notes that the Hawthorne plant had its own power generator and experienced
frequent fluctuations in voltage that affected the intensity of artificial lighting. Snow’s unpublished report was graciously provided by Wrege. The report is contained in the Kheel Center for Labor-Management Documentation and
Archives, Martin Catherwood Library, Cornell University.
9
There is no mention of turnover of employees either in the published description of the illumination studies
(Snow 1927), or in the unpublished documents that we have seen. The issue of turnover does appear to have had
an important role in determining output fluctuations in the later “first relay” experiments (Franke and Kaul 1978).

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

Percent deviation from average output
in the five days prior to Monday

Vol. 3 No. 1

231

5

0

−5
Weeks with experimental change
Weeks without experimental change

−10
Wednesday

Friday SaturdayMonday

Wednesday

Friday

Figure 3. Comparison of Productivity between Weeks with and without Experimental Light Changes
Notes: This figure presents daily fluctuations in output per worker. The black line reflects weeks in which light
was experimentally altered. For purposes of comparison, output fluctuations are also shown for weeks in which
no experimental change occurred. All lighting changes took effect on Mondays, as denoted by the vertical line.
Values in the figure are percent deviations from the average output in the five days preceding the Monday shown
in the figure.

increased or decreased. Figure 3 plots average daily output in the five days preceding an experimental change and in the five days after a change to test this claim. As
noted above, all lighting changes were instituted on Mondays. Because output varies
systematically by day of the week, we also report the output patterns for the ten days
surrounding Mondays in which there was no change in experimental conditions for
purposes of comparison. For both lines, we have normalized output around the average productivity in the preceding five days. The gap between these two lines reflects
a systematic response of output to variations in lighting.
As is apparent in Figure 3, output rises sharply on Mondays regardless of whether
artificial light is altered. Output is no higher on the day of the lighting change, but is
somewhat greater 2–5 days after an experimental change in the raw data—a pattern
potentially consistent with a Hawthorne effect and the experimental data in Gneezy
and List (2006). As we demonstrate below, however, in our regression specifications, the gap between these two lines remains, but is measured imprecisely.10
In order to more formally analyze these issues we estimate regression models:
(1) 	

5

Outpu​trt​ ​ = ​∑
​ ​​δ​k​Ert−k
​ ​ +  ​β1​​t + ​β2​​​t​2​ + ​λr​​ + ​Xrt​ ​Φ + ​εrt​ ​,
k=0

where r and t index a room and time, respectively. E is a series of indicator variable
reflecting whether there was an experimentally driven change in artificial light on
each of the previous six days. We control for both linear and quadratic trends in output over time, as well as room fixed-effects. X is a vector of controls that includes
weather conditions, indicators for the day of the week and the month, as well as
10
Dividing experimental changes in lighting conditions into those that are positive (i.e., light levels are
increased) and negative (light levels are lowered) yields patterns that are similar.

232

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011
Table 1—Immediate Response of Output to Experimental Variation
Regression Analysis of Experimentation with Lighting on Output
(Dependent Variable: Daily Output per Worker (Baseline = 100))
(1)

Day of experimental change
One day after experimental change
Two days after experimental change
Three days after experimental change
Four days after experimental change
Five days after experimental change
Linear time trend
Quadratic time trend divided by 10,000
R2
Includes controls?
Includes month-year interactions?
Includes room-month-year interactions?
p-value: Test of joint significance of
experimental change dummies

−1.021
(0.81)
1.076
(0.80)
0.383
(0.80)
0.707
(0.83)
0.888
(0.81)
0.439
(0.81)
0.025
(0.00)
−0.034
(0.03)
0.69
Yes
No
No
0.252

(2)

−1.350
(0.80)
0.818
(0.79)
0.232
(0.79)
0.462
(0.82)
0.556
(0.80)
0.129
(0.80)
0.065
(0.03)
−0.079
(0.29)
0.71
Yes
Yes
No
0.702

(3)

−1.282
(0.75)
0.849
(0.74)
0.208
(0.74)
0.307
(0.77)
0.344
(0.76)
−0.051
(0.76)
0.052
(0.03)
−0.020
(0.28)
0.75
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.858

Notes: The unit of observation is daily output per worker in a room, normalized to equal 100 in
the baseline period. Entries in the table are regression coefficients with accompanying standard
errors. All specifications include linear and quadratic trends, weather conditions, day and week
indicators, day-before-holiday and day-after-holiday indicators, defective inputs, variations in
output-checking, and room fixed effects. Specification (2) also controls for room-month-year
interactions. The number of observations is equal to 1,502 in all specifications. Full regression
results are presented in the online Appendix.

indicators for days before and after a work-canceling holiday, and days in which the
inputs were denoted as defective. We also include the frequency with which output
is checked and whether workers are located in their original room in the vector
of controls. In some specifications we add month × year interactions to provide
more flexibility in the way that output fluctuates over time. In other specifications
we include room × month × year interactions so that treatment effect identification
comes solely from comparisons of observations in the same room, month, and year.
The coefficients of primary interest from the estimation are presented in
Table 1. Column 1 includes all control variables except the month × year
and room × month × year interactions, which are added in columns 2 and 3,
respectively.11 Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The bottom row of the table

11

Estimated coefficients on these control variables are not presented in Table 1 for parsimony, but full results are
presented in the online Appendix. The trend in output over time is positive, but concave. The estimated coefficients
on the control variables are intuitive, and imply that output responds positively to light, negatively to high temperatures, and is low after holidays, when the inputs used are defective, and when the workers are moved to a new room.

Vol. 3 No. 1

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

233

reports the p-value for rejecting the null hypothesis that the sum of the indicator variables for recent experimental changes in lighting.
None of the coefficients in any of the three columns is statistically significant. The
point estimate is negative on the first day light is changed and, in almost all cases,
positive on the following days. The combined impact is positive, but we cannot
reject that the sum of the coefficients is equal to zero, as shown in the last row of the
table. The claim that output immediately and positively responded to experimentally
induced changes in lighting is not supported by the data.12
B. Longer Run Fluctuations in Output as Evidence of a Hawthorne Effect
Even if productivity does not respond immediately to manipulations in lighting,
over a longer time horizon a Hawthorne effect might manifest itself as an unusually
large increase in productivity in those rooms subjected to experimentation, potentially followed by a decline in output when the experiments are halted.
Figure 4 shows how output varied by week in each of the three rooms. In the first
year, experimental manipulation occurred in all three rooms with no well-defined
control group. Productivity changes in the three rooms follow a very similar pattern in the first year of the study. Output initially rises sharply and steadily, reaching a peak roughly 10 percent above the baseline productivity prior to the start of
the experiment. Using information from annual company reports from the 1920s,
we estimate that output per worker for the plant as a whole increased 1.4 percent
per year over the period the illumination experiments were active. As crude as this
analysis is, these large productivity increases relative to the rest of the plant nonetheless stand as some of the most compelling evidence in support of a Hawthorne effect
that we are able to muster from the data.
The decline in output after experimentation is temporarily halted in April of the
first year, while also superficially consistent with a Hawthorne effect that fades with
time, appears instead to merely be due to seasonal fluctuations in output. That same
decline is observed in later years, even for rooms that are not being actively experimented upon.
The second round of experiments arguably provides more useful variation than
the first round because only room 1 was subjected to experimental variation in
that period, which is bracketed by the third and fourth vertical lines in Figure 3.
Consequently, rooms 2 and 3 serve as quasi-control groups for room 1, although
it should be stressed that there is no evidence that any sort of randomization was
involved in the choice to continue experimentation in room 1, but not in rooms 2
and 3. Room 1 experienced large productivity gains during this second phase of
experimentation (with output peaking around 20 percent above the pre-experimental
baseline), but interestingly, room 2 (and to a lesser extent room 3) also saw substantial increases in output over this interval despite the fact that those workers were no
longer included in the experiment.
12
Similar conclusions are reached when we limit our sample only to the period when one room was being
experimented on and the other two rooms were not—a source of variation that conforms more closely to the notion
of treatment and control.

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011
Output (baseline = 100)

234

130
120
110

100

Room 1

d
en
ts
en
r im
pe
Ex

us
ts

en

pe
rim
in e
Ex ro nts
pe om res
rim 1 ta
Bl
en on r t
ac
ts ly
kou
in pa
te
ro us
om ed
xp
er
1
i
in me
ro nt
om s b
1 egi
on n
ly

Ex

Ex

pe
rim

en

ts

pa

be

gi

n

ed

90

pe
r im
Ex

Room 2

Room 3

Figure 4. Output During the Illumination Experiments Over Time, by Room
Notes: Values in the figure represent weekly average output per worker, normalized to equal 100 in the baseline
period preceding experimentation. All rooms participated in the initial round of experiments; only room 1 was part
of later rounds of experimentation. Output data is available only for Room 1 in the latter part of the sample.

In the final two periods shown in Figure 3, output was tracked only for room 1,
making it difficult to estimate the experimental impact. Output steadily increased
during this last phase of experimentation, rose sharply when the experiments
stopped, fell sharply during the following summer, but then rebounded to all-time
highs toward the end of the sample period when no experimentation was ongoing.
Table 2 presents regression estimates of the relationship between output and
the presence or absence of experimentation. In these specifications, we divide all
observations into one of three mutually exclusive categories: the roughly one month
baseline period prior to the start of experimentation, times when active experimentation is ongoing,13 and times when experimentation has been suspended. We include
indicator variables for the latter two of these classifications; thus the period before
experimentation begins is the omitted category against which the other effects are
measured. The same set of controls employed in Table 1 is also included in these
regressions. The structure of this table parallels that of Table 1; column 2 adds
month-year interactions, and column 3 controls for room-month-year interactions.
Results from the specification in columns 1 and 2 are consistent with a Hawthorne
effect. In column 1, when experimentation is ongoing, output is 3–4 percent higher
than in the pre-experimentation baseline and the nonexperimental periods, even
after controlling for other factors including linear and quadratic time trends and
the amount of light. The results change somewhat in column 2, when month-year
interactions are included. The implied gap between periods of experimentation and
nonexperimentation jumps to nearly 6 percent. Although the experimental period is
no longer statistically distinguishable from the pre-period, this comparison is based

13
This variable is equal to one in the first round of experimentation in all three rooms and in the later rounds of
experimenting for room 1 only.

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

Vol. 3 No. 1

235

Table 2—Long-Term Response of Output to Experimental Variation

Pre-experimentation (baseline)
Experimentation ongoing
Experimentation paused or completed
Linear time trend
Quadratic time trend divided by 10,000
R2
Includes controls?
Includes month-year interactions?
Includes room-month-year interactions?

(1)

−
3.154
(0.86)
−1.187
(1.60)
0.023
(0.00)
−0.019
(0.03)
0.70
Yes
No
No

(2)

−
0.787
(1.53)
−4.992
(2.13)
0.059
(0.03)
−0.078
(0.30)
0.71
Yes
Yes
No

(3)

−
1.201
(1.46)
2.743
(2.41)
0.045
(0.03)
0.040
(0.29)
0.75
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The unit of observation is daily output per worker in a room, normalized to equal 100 in
the baseline period. Entries in the table are regression coefficients with accompanying standard
errors. All specifications include linear and quadratic trends, weather conditions, day and week
indicators, day-before-holiday and day-after-holiday indicators, defective inputs, variations in
output-checking, and room fixed effects. Specification (2) also controls for room-month-year
interactions. The number of observations is equal to 1,502 in all specifications. Full regression
results are presented in the online Appendix.

on just a few days of experimental data from the end of December 1924 since only
comparisons within month and year identify the parameters.14
Column 3, which adds room-month-year interactions, asks a slightly different
question of the data. These estimates are identified solely from within-room variation in output in the months when experimentation is started or halted. Consequently,
the top two rows of column 3 show whether there is an abrupt jump up or down in
output associated with turning the experiment on or off. Unlike the first two columns, the coefficient on experimentation is not statistically different from the coefficient on nonexperimentation, providing little support for the argument that output
immediately responds to initiating or ending experimentation.
C. Excess Sensitivity to Experimental Manipulation in Light as Evidence
of a Hawthorne Effect
Empirical results presented thus far do not exploit the information we have on how
total light is composed. As noted earlier, one manner in which a Hawthorne effect
might manifest itself is with output being more responsive to changes in artificial light
than to fluctuations in natural light. The logic for this argument is that workers know
that the experimenter does not control fluctuations in natural light which are driven by
weather and seasonal changes. Only changes in artificial light are manipulated, and

14

Identification in column 2 comes from two sources of variation: months in which experimentation is turned
on or off, and cross-room variation in period 2 when room 1 was subject to experimentation, but not the other two
rooms. The results are similar when the sample is limited to only the latter source of identification by using only
data from the second period.

236

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011
Table 3—Response of Output to Variations in the Level of Artificial
versus Natural Light

Artificial light
Natural light
Linear time trend
Quadratic time trend divided by 10,000
R2
Includes controls?
Includes month-year interactions?
Includes room-month-year interactions?

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.056
(0.02)
−0.045
(0.03)
0.061
(0.01)
−0.558
(0.12)
0.75
Yes
No
No

0.033
(0.02)
−0.018
(0.03)
0.075
(0.03)
−0.283
(0.38)
0.76
Yes
Yes
No

0.0329
(0.02)
−0.021
(0.03)
0.075
(0.03)
−0.282
(0.37)
0.77
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The unit of observation is daily output per worker in a room, normalized to equal 100 in
the baseline period. Entries in the table are regression coefficients with accompanying standard
errors. All specifications include linear and quadratic trends, weather conditions, day and week
indicators, day-before-holiday and day-after-holiday indicators, defective inputs, variations in
output-checking, and room fixed effects. Specification (2) also controls for room-month-year
interactions. The number of observations is equal to 1,502 in all specifications. Full regression
results are presented in the online Appendix.

thus, if workers are particularly influenced by experimental variation, they should be
more responsive to artificial light. In addition, changes in artificial light were brought
to the attention of the workers on the morning of the new treatment, whereas weather
driven changes in natural light were not reported to the workers. As such, one might
even expect to see productivity rise in response to experimentally induced reductions in man-made light if the Hawthorne effect is stronger than any direct impact of
reduced light on the production process. To the best of our knowledge, this implication
regarding Hawthorne effects has not been previously recognized or empirically tested.
Table 3 presents results for this new test. The dataset utilized in Table 3 includes
fewer observations than in the two previous tables because we observe the breakdown between artificial and natural light in only a subset of the data.15 The key righthand-side variables in Table 3 are the measured quantities of natural and artificial
light in a given room on a particular day. In all other regards, Table 3 parallels the
earlier tables. In both columns 1 and 2, artificial light enters positively (in one case
statistically significant, but not in the other), whereas natural light is negative and
insignificant in both columns. The actual magnitude of the impact of fluctuations in
artificial light is not particularly large, however. A one-standard deviation change in
artificial light increases output by less than 1 percent. While clearly circumstantial,
this pattern is directionally consistent with a Hawthorne effect because the increase
in output in response to artificial light is greater than for natural light.16
15
When we do not separate natural and artificial light, but rather combine the two to obtain total light, each
foot-candle of additional light is associated with a statistically significant, but relatively small, increase of 0.0865
units of output. Thus, a one standard deviation increase in light raises output by 1–2 percent. Yet, adding month by
year interactions yields a coefficient that is statistically insignificant and trivial in magnitude.
16
An additional caveat regarding this estimation approach is that natural light is likely to be measured with
greater error than artificial light since the light readings were gathered at just a few specific times during the day.

Vol. 3 No. 1

levitt and list: hawthorne effect

237

IV. Conclusions

The Hawthorne plant studies, and the concept of a Hawthorne effect that emerged
from this seminal research, stand among the most influential social science research
of the twentieth century. The purported influence of observation on measured
treatment effects in these experiments has led to a proliferation of research and
methodologies to control for the confounding influence that scrutiny can have (e.g.,
Desmond L. Cook 1962; Glenn W. Harrison and List 2004). Outside of the academy, results from the Hawthorne studies bolstered the human relations movement,
considerably influenced employee/employer relations, and remain an important
influence on the optimal incentive schemes employed in the workplace.
This study returns to the very evidence that induced this contemporary wave of
thought by examining new data that was presumed lost. Ironically, there is little
evidence of the type of Hawthorne effect widely attributed to these data when one
subjects them to careful analysis. We do see evidence that workers, over a longer
time horizon, appear to respond positively to experimentation. We also propose and
test a new manifestation of the Hawthorne effect: whether workers differentially
respond to natural and man-made light. We find some weak evidence that workers
respond more acutely to the experimental manipulations than to naturally occurring
fluctuations in light.
The illumination studies have been hailed as being among the most important
social science experiments of all time, but an honest appraisal of this experiment
reveals that the experimental design was not strong, the manner in which the studies
were carried out was lacking, and the results were mixed at best. Perhaps fittingly, a
meta-analysis of the research testing the enormous body of research into Hawthorne
effects triggered by this initial study yields equally mixed results (Adair, Sharpe,
and Hyunh 1989).
Perhaps the most important lesson to be learned from the original Hawthorne
experiments is the power of a good story. The mythology surrounding the Hawthorne
experiments arose largely absent careful data analysis, and has persisted for decades
even in the face of strong evidence against it generated by Franke and Kaul (1978)
and Jones (1992). While our research is probably no more likely than the previous
papers to put an end to such myths, at a minimum it raises the costs of propagating
these stories among those who are concerned with scientific accuracy.
References
Adair, John G., Donald Sharpe, and Cam-Loi Huynh. 1989. “Hawthorne Control Procedures in Edu-

cational Experiments: A Reconsideration of Their Use and Effectiveness.” Review of Educational
Research, 59(2): 215–28.
Blalock, Ann B., and Hubert M. Blalock. 1982. Introduction to Social Research. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bloombaum, Milton. 1983. “The Hawthorne Experiments: A Critique and Reanalysis of the First Statistical Interpretation by Franke and Kaul.” Sociological Perspectives, 26(1): 71–88.

This could lead to attenuation bias for natural light. Furthermore, we are making a structural assumption on the
marginal value of artificial and natural light to the production process.

238

American Economic Journal: applied economicsjanuary 2011

Cook, Desmond L. 1962. “The Hawthorne Effect in Educational Research.” Phi Delta Kappan, 44(3):

116–22.

Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer. 2008. “Using Randomization in Develop-

ment Economics Research: A Toolkit.” In Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 4, ed. T. Paul
Schultz and John A. Strauss, 3895–3962. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Franke, Richard Herbert, and James D. Kaul. 1978. “The Hawthorne Experiments: First Statistical
Interpretation.” American Sociological Review, 43(5): 623–43.
Freedman, Jonathan, David O. Sears, and J. Merrill Carlsmith. 1981. Social Psychology. 4th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gale, E. A. M. 2004. “The Hawthorne Studies––A Fable for Our Times?” Quarterly Journal of Medicine, 97(7): 439–49.
Gillespie, Richard. 1991. Manufacturing Knowledge: A History of the Hawthorne Experiments. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Gneezy, Uri, and John A. List. 2006. “Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift
Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1365–84.
Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. List. 2004. “Field Experiments.” Journal of Economic Literature,
42(4): 1009–55.
Hart, C. W. M. 1943. “The Hawthorne Experiments.” Canadian Journal of Economics and Political
Science, 9(2): 150–63.
Heckman, James J. 1991. “Randomization and Social Policy Evaluation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper 107.
Jones, Stephen R. G. 1992. “Was There a Hawthorne Effect?” American Journal of Sociology, 98(3):
451–68.
Kompier, Michiel A. J. 2006. “The ‘Hawthorne Effect’ Is A Myth, But What Keeps the Story Going?”
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment, & Health, 32(5): 402–12.
Levitt, Steven D., and John A. List. 2007. “What do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences Reveal About the Real World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 153–174.
List, John A. 2006. “Field Experiments: A Bridge between Lab and Naturally Occurring Data.”
Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 6(2): Article 8.
Malani, Anup. 2006. “Identifying Placebo Effects with Data from Clinical Trials.” Journal of Political
Economy, 114(2): 236–56.
Mallach, Stanley, and Steven Smith, ed. 1977. “Records of Industrial Relations Experiment Carried
out by Western Electric Company at the Hawthorne Works, Hawthorne, Illinois.” Milwaukee, WI:
University of Wisconsin Library Microfilms.
Mayo, Elton. 1933. The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization. New York: Macmillan Company.
Peters, Thomas J., and Robert H. Waterman, Jr. 1982. In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America’s Best-Run Companies. New York: Harper & Row.
Rice, Berkeley. 1982. “The Hawthorne Defect: Persistence of a Flawed Theory.” Psychology Today,
16(2): 71–74.
Roethlisberger, F. J., and William J. Dickson. 1939. Management and the Worker. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Snow, C. E. 1927. “Research on Industrial Illumination.” Tech Engineering News, 8: 257–82.
Wrege, Charles. 1986. Facts and Fallacies of Hawthorne: A Historical Study of the Origins, Procedures, and Results of the Hawthorne Illumination Tests and Their Influence upon the Hawthorne
Studies. New York: Garland.

This article has been cited by:
1. Chen-Bo Zhong, Julian House. 2012. Hawthorne revisited: Organizational implications of the
physical work environment. Research in Organizational Behavior . [CrossRef]
2. Md. Jasim Uddin, Nirod Chandra Saha, Ziaul Islam, Iqbal Ansary Khan, Shamsuzzaman,
M.A. Quaiyum, Tracey Perez Koehlmoos. 2011. Improving low coverage of child
immunization in rural hard-to-reach areas of Bangladesh: Findings from a project using
multiple interventions. Vaccine . [CrossRef]
3. Michael Kosfeld, , Susanne Neckermann. 2011. Getting More Work for Nothing? Symbolic
Awards and Worker Performance. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3:3, 86-99.
[Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
4. Oriana Bandiera, , Iwan Barankay, , Imran Rasul. 2011. Field Experiments with Firms.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 25:3, 63-82. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]

