Journal of the American Statistical Association

ISSN: 0162-1459 (Print) 1537-274X (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uasa20

Balancing Covariates via Propensity Score
Weighting
Fan Li, Kari Lock Morgan & Alan M. Zaslavsky
To cite this article: Fan Li, Kari Lock Morgan & Alan M. Zaslavsky (2018) Balancing Covariates
via Propensity Score Weighting, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113:521, 390-400,
DOI: 10.1080/01621459.2016.1260466
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2016.1260466

Accepted author version posted online: 16
Dec 2016.
Published online: 13 Nov 2017.
Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 2705

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 10 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uasa20

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION
, VOL. , NO. , –, Theory and Methods
https://doi.org/./..

Balancing Covariates via Propensity Score Weighting
Fan Lia , Kari Lock Morganb , and Alan M. Zaslavskyc
a
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC; b Department of Statistics, Penn State University, University Park, PA; c Department of
Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Covariate balance is crucial for unconfounded descriptive or causal comparisons. However, lack of balance
is common in observational studies. This article considers weighting strategies for balancing covariates.
We define a general class of weights—the balancing weights—that balance the weighted distributions of
the covariates between treatment groups. These weights incorporate the propensity score to weight each
group to an analyst-selected target population. This class unifies existing weighting methods, including
commonly used weights such as inverse-probability weights as special cases. General large-sample results
on nonparametric estimation based on these weights are derived. We further propose a new weighting
scheme, the overlap weights, in which each unit’s weight is proportional to the probability of that unit being
assigned to the opposite group. The overlap weights are bounded, and minimize the asymptotic variance
of the weighted average treatment effect among the class of balancing weights. The overlap weights also
possess a desirable small-sample exact balance property, based on which we propose a new method that
achieves exact balance for means of any selected set of covariates. Two applications illustrate these methods
and compare them with other approaches.

Received February 
Revised October 

1. Introduction
Unconfounded comparison between groups is a central goal
in many observational studies. Comparative effectiveness studies aim to estimate the causal effect of a treatment or intervention unconfounded by differences between characteristics of
those assigned to the treatment and control conditions under
current practice. Noncausal descriptive studies often concern a
controlled and unconfounded comparison of two populations,
such as comparing outcomes among populations of different
races or of cohorts in different years while giving the comparison groups similar distributions of some important covariates.
Whether the purpose of the study is causal or descriptive, comparisons between groups can be biased when the groups lack
balance, that is, have substantially different distributions of relevant covariates.
Standard parametric adjustment by regression is often sensitive to model misspecification when groups differ greatly
in observed characteristics (Rubin 1979). A commonly used
nonparametric balancing strategy is weighting, which applies
weights to the sample of units in each treatment group to match
the covariate distribution of a target population, and the comparison is made between the weighted outcomes. The literature on weighting (e.g., Robins and Rotnitzky 1995; Hahn 1998;
Robins, Hernan, and Brumback 2000; Hirano and Imbens 2001;
Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder 2003; Imbens 2004; Crump et al.
2009) has been dominated by the inverse-probability weights
(IPW), originating from survey research. A special case of IPW
is the Horvitz–Thompson (HT) weight (Horvitz and Thompson
1952), which for each unit is the inverse of the probability of that

Balancing weights; Causal
inference; Clinical equipoise;
Confounding; Exact balance;
Overlap weights

unit being assigned to the observed group. The HT weights correspond to estimands defined on the population represented by
the combined treatment and control groups, such as the average
treatment effect (ATE) in causal studies. Variants of IPWs targeting at treatment effects on the treated group (ATT) or other
subpopulations have also been commonly used (e.g., Hirano and
Imbens 2001; Li and Greene 2013).
The ATE and ATT estimands are widely accepted, largely
because they represent effects on easy-to-interpret target populations, and estimators of these effects possess desirable statistical properties. For example, Manski (1990) showed that in
cases where the outcome variable is bounded, sharp bounds on
the ATE and ATT can be derived. However, the automatic focus
on these estimands is often questionable in practice. First, ATE
and ATT may correspond to the effect of an infeasible intervention. For example, the ATE corresponds to the effect of switching every unit in the study population from one treatment to the
other; such a complete change in treatment is rarely conceivable in medical studies, where the treatment might be known
to be harmful to patients with certain characteristics. Imbens
and Wooldridge (2009) made a similar argument in the context of a job training program. Second, as Rosenbaum (2012)
explained, “ …often the available data do not represent a natural population, and so there is no compelling reason to estimate
the effect of the treatment on all people recorded in this source
of data …” In such cases, applying the HT or ATT weights to
the observed sample might not yield an estimate of the average treatment effect in the scientifically appropriate target population. Third, researchers commonly exclude some units from

CONTACT Fan Li
fli@stat.duke.edu
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC .
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/r/JASA.
©  American Statistical Association

KEYWORDS

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

the final analysis, for example, unmatched units or units with
extremely large weights. The remaining sample may only represent a subpopulation of the original targeted population and
this subpopulation can vary from study to study. Fourth, with
ATE and ATT extreme probabilities (close to 0 or 1) introduce
extreme IPWs, with adverse finite-sample consequences such as
poor balance and large variance (Busso, DiNardo, and McCrary
2014). Finally, in causal inference there is ample precedent for
prioritizing covariate balance between treatment groups over
generalizability to a recognizable target population, as demonstrated by the huge body of experimental evidence based on
randomization of treatment within a nonrandomly selected (in
many cases convenience) sample.
A recent strand of literature suggests shifting the focus from
ATE or ATT to subpopulations with sufficient overlap in covariates between treatments. Crump et al. (2009) advocated focusing
on the “optimal” subpopulation for which the average treatment
effect can be estimated with the smallest variance, approximated
by discarding all units with estimated propensity scores outside
the range [α, 1 − α]. However, as illustrated in Section 5.3, this
approach can be sensitive to the choice of the cutoff point, for
which there is no strong theoretical guidance, and can possibly exclude much of the study sample. In an example by Crump
et al. (2006), setting α to 0.1 removes 90% of the study sample;
the same will occur if one of the groups is much larger than the
other, driving propensity scores close to 0 or 1. Moreover, the
propensity-score-based cutoff criterion may be difficult to interpret in practice (Traskin and Small 2011).
In this article, we define the class of balancing weights that
balance the distributions of covariates between comparison
groups for any prespecified target population. We stress that the
choice of target population distribution is neither automatic nor
restricted to the ATT and ATE. Within this class of weights,
we introduce the overlap weights, which weight each unit proportional to its probability of assignment to the opposite group.
Unlike the IPWs, the overlap weights are bounded between 0
and 1 so the weighted distributions are always integrable. Under
mild conditions, the overlap weights minimize the asymptotic
variance of the nonparametric estimate of the weighted average
treatment effect within the class of balancing weights.
Applications of these weights have appeared in the health services literature at least since 2001 (Schneider et al. 2001) but
without theoretical development. Large-sample results on overlap weights appeared in the working article by Crump et al.
(2006), who regarded the subpopulation defined by the overlap weights as merely a device to “acknowledge and address the
difficulties in making inferences about the population of primary interest.” In contrast, we foreground the overlap weights
as defining a population of substantial clinical or policy interest,
namely, the subpopulation that currently receives either treatment in substantial proportions. We illustrate the substantive
relevance of this target population and estimand in two applications, one concerning racial disparities in medical expenditure
and one concerning evaluation of a medical treatment. Overlap weights estimated from a logistic model also have a useful
small-sample property: they yield exact balance between groups
in the means of each covariate included in the model. This property can be exploited in a hybrid that imposes exact balance on
a matched sample by reweighting it.

391

Section 2 introduces the general framework of balancing weights and defines corresponding estimands. Section 3
presents three large-sample properties of the nonparametric weighting estimators. In Section 4, we propose the overlap weights, present a small-sample exact balance result,
and describe the new matching-weighting hybrid method. In
Section 5, we illustrate the proposed methods through simulations and two real applications. Section 6 concludes.

2. Balancing Weights
Consider a sample or finite population of n units, each belonging
to one of two groups for which covariate-balanced comparisons
are of interest, possibly defined by a treatment. Let Zi = z be
the binary variable indicating membership in groups that may
be labeled treatment (z = 1) and control (z = 0). For each unit,
an outcome Yi and a set of covariates Xi = (Xi1 , . . . , XiK ) are
observed. The propensity score (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) is
the probability of assignment to the treatment group given the
covariates, e(x) = Pr(Zi = 1|Xi = x).
In descriptive comparisons, “assignment” is to a nonmanipulable state defining membership in one of two groups, and a
common objective is to evaluate the average difference in the
outcome in two groups with balanced distributions of covariates. We first define the conditional average controlled difference
(ACD) (Li, Landrum, and Zaslavsky 2013) for a given x as
τ (x) ≡ E(Y |Z = 1, X = x) − E(Y |Z = 0, X = x).

(1)

For causal comparisons, we adopt the potential outcome
framework (Rubin 1974, 1978; Imbens and Rubin 2015).
Assuming the standard stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA; Rubin 1980), which states that the potential outcomes for each unit are unaffected by the treatment assignments
of other units, each unit has potential outcomes {Yi (z), z =
0, 1} corresponding to the possible treatment levels, of which
only one is observed: Yi = ZiYi (1) + (1 − Zi )Yi (0). Under the
unconfoundedness assumption, that is, {Y (0), Y (1)} ⊥ Z|X, we
have Pr(Y (z)|X ) = Pr(Y |X, Z = z) for z = 0, 1, so τ (x) in (1)
is a causal estimand—the average treatment effect (ATE) conditional on x:
τ (x) = E[Y (1) − Y (0)|X = x].

(2)

Estimation of either comparison requires the probabilistic
assignment assumption, 0 < e(X ) < 1, which states that the
study population is restricted to values of covariates for which
there can be both control and treated units. Assignment mechanisms assuming both probabilistic assignment and unconfoundedness are strongly ignorable (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983).
Typically in either descriptive or causal comparisons the
(potential) outcomes are compared not for a single x but rather
averaged over a hypothesized target distribution of the covariates. Assume the marginal density of the covariates X, f (x),
exists, with respect to a base measure μ (a product of counting
measure with respect to categorical variables and Lebesgue measure for continuous variables). We then represent the target population density by f (x)h(x), where h(·) is prespecified function
of x, and define a general class of estimands by the expectation of

392

F. LI, K. MORGAN, AND A. ZASLAVSKY

the conditional ACD or ATE τ (x) over the target population:

τh ≡

τ (dx) f (x)h(x)μ(dx)

.
f (x)h(x)μ(dx)

(3)

and

w1 (x) ∝
w0 (x) ∝

h(x)

Estimand




ATE

Treated

e(x)

ATT

Control

1 − e(x)

ATC

Overlap

e(x)(1 − e(x))

ATO

Truncated
combined

1(α < e(x) < 1 − α)

Matching

min{e(x), 1 − e(x)}





Weight (w1 , w0 )

1
, 1 − 1e(x) [HT]
e(x)


1, 1 −e(x)
e(x)


1 − e(x)
e(x) , 1

(1 − e(x), e(x))
1(α<e(x)<1 − α) 1(α<e(x)<1 − α)
,
e(x)
1 − e(x)



min{e(x),1 − e(x)} min{e(x),1 − e(x)}
,
e(x)
1 − e(x)



f0 (x) ∝ f (x)(1 − e(x)).

For a given h(x), to estimate τh , we can weight fz (x) to the target population using the following weights (proportional up to
a normalizing constant):


Target population
Combined

For descriptive comparisons, τh is the weighted ACD, and for
causal comparisons it is the weighted average treatment effect
(WATE; Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder 2003), the term we use
henceforth for either case.
Let fz (x) = Pr(X = x|Z = z) be the density of X in the Z =
z group, then
f1 (x) ∝ f (x)e(x),

Table . Examples of balancing weights and corresponding target population and
estimand under diﬀerent h.

f (x)h(x)
= h(x)
,
f (x)e(x)
e(x)
f (x)h(x)
h(x)
= 1−e(x)
,
f (x)(1−e(x))

for Z = 1,
for Z = 0.

(4)

We call this class of weights defined in (4) the balancing weights
because they balance the weighted distributions of the covariates
between comparison groups:
f1 (x)w1 (x) = f0 (x)w0 (x) = f (x)h(x).

(5)

The function h can take any form, and all weights that balance the covariate distributions between groups can be specified
within this class.
Specification of h defines the target population and estimands
and determines the weights. Statistical, scientific, and policy
considerations all may come into play. When h(x) = 1, the corresponding target population f (x) is the combined (treated and
control) population, the weights (w1 , w0 ) are the HT weights
(1/e(x), 1/(1 − e(x))), and the estimand is the ATE for the
combined population, τ ATE = E[Y (1) − Y (0)]. When h(x) =
e(x), the target population is the treated subpopulation, the
weights are (1, e(x)/(1 − e(x))), and the estimand is the average treatment effect for the treated (ATT), τ ATT = E[Y (1) −
Y (0)|Z = 1]. When h(x) = 1 − e(x), the target population is
the control subpopulation, the weights are ((1 − e(x))/e(x), 1),
and the estimand is the average treatment effect for the control
(ATC), τ ATC = E[Y (1) − Y (0)|Z = 0]. By choosing h from the
class of indicator functions, one can define the ATE for truncated subpopulations of substantive interest or with desirable
theoretical properties. For example, Crump et al. (2009) recommended use of h(x) = 1(α < e(x) < 1 − α) with a prespecified α ∈ (0, 1/2) that defines a subpopulation with sufficient
overlap of covariates between two groups. Li and Greene (2013)
proposed to use h(x) = min{e(x), 1 − e(x)}, which defines
a weighting analog to pair matching; a similar notion was
discussed by Dehejia and Wahba (1999). These examples are
summarized in Table 1. Formulation (4) also allows applicationspecific choices of h that are not functions of the propensity
score, possibly to select a subpopulation of interest (like an age
range) or to match its covariate distribution.

3. Large-Sample Properties of Nonparametric
Estimators
Here, we establish properties of the sample estimator of WATE,


w0 (xi )(1 − Zi )Yi
i w1 (xi )ZiYi
,
(6)
− i
τ̂h = 
i w1 (xi )Zi
i w0 (xi )(1 − Zi )
where the sum is over a sample drawn from density f (x). Proofs
of the following three large-sample results regarding τ̂h are in the
Appendix; a rigorous development of these and other properties
of nonparametric estimators under the required regularity conditions appears in Imbens (2004) and Crump et al. (2006).
Theorem 1. τ̂h is a consistent estimator of τh .
The next result concerns the component of variation due
to residual (model) variation in τ̂h conditional on the sampled covariate design points X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, the first term of
the decomposition V[τ̂h ] = Ex V[τ̂h | X] + Vx E[τ̂h | X], showing that it can be characterized after making only limited
assumptions about residual variances, as in the corollary below.
The second term arises from the dependence of the expectation of (6) on the sample, and estimating it involves the outcome
model (associations between Y (z) and x). However, as Imbens
(2004) argued, individual variation is typically much larger than
conditional mean variation, so the benefit of further optimizing the weights by a preliminary look at the outcomes typically
would not justify the risk of biasing model specification to attain
desired results. Hence, our weighting strategy is based on general results concerning the first term.
Theorem 2. As n → ∞, the expectation (over possible samples
of covariate values) of the conditional variance of the estimator
τ̂h given the sample X = {x1 , . . . , xn } converges:

n · Ex V[τ̂h | X] →
f (x)h(x)2 [v 1 (x)/e(x)

(7)
+ v 0 (x)/(1 − e(x))] μ(dx) Ch2 ,

where v z (x) = V[Y (z) | X] and Ch = h(x) f (x)dμ(x) is a
normalizing constant.
Consequently, if the residual variance is assumed to be
homoscedastic across both groups, v 1 (x) = v 0 (x) = v, then the
asymptotic variance of τ̂h simplifies to

f (x)h(x)2 μ(dx)
2
n · Ex V[τ̂h | X] → v/Ch
.
(8)
e(x)(1 − e(x))

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

Corollary 1. The function h(x) ∝ e(x)(1 − e(x)) gives the
smallest asymptotic variance for the weighted estimator τ̂h
among all h’s under homoscedasticity, and as n → ∞,

f (x)e(x)(1 − e(x))μ(dx).

n · minh {Ex V[τ̂h | X]} → v/Ch2

In applications, the true propensity score e is unknown and
is replaced by the estimated propensity score ê. As shown by
Rosenbaum (1987) and Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003), a
consistent estimate of the propensity score in fact leads to more
efficient estimation than the true propensity score.
These theoretical results have important practical consequences for propensity score weighting analysis. First, calibration of the propensity score model is important: the predicted
and empirical rates of treatment assignment should agree in relevant subsets of the covariate space, or else covariate balance
cannot be attained. A simple check is to compare predicted and
observed rates in deciles (or other convenient intervals appropriate to the amount of data) of the score distribution, in the
spirit of Hosmer and Lemeshow (1980). If miscalibration is
identified, likely indicating a misfit in the link function, it can
be corrected by ad hoc methods such as ratio adjustment of
each decile or adding indicator variables for the deciles of a trial
model to the final model (if the error is relatively small), or by fitting a flexible logistic spline model relating the estimated linear
predictor to treatment assignment. Estimates of treatment effect
by decile may also be of scientific interest for assessing association of treatment assignment with treatment effect.
Second, a rich propensity score model, rather than a parsimonious one, is desirable, especially in causal inference applications, because the ignorability assumptions are likely to be
violated if the propensity score is only a simple logistic-linear
function of the covariates but both the outcome and assignment mechanism are functions of more complex interactions or
nonlinear terms. Given this, traditional statistical tests of goodness of fit are only minimally relevant, because the objective of
weighting is to balance covariate distributions in the sample, not
to make inferences about assignment probabilities in the population. Rather, the limitation on model complexity is imposed by a
bias-variance tradeoff. As the model becomes more complex and
therefore more predictive, propensity scores move toward 0 and
1, becoming exactly 0 or 1 when the model discovers a separating plane in the data. Thus, the weights h(x) = e(x)(1 − e(x))
for many design points move toward zero, reducing the precision of estimates. Analytic judgment is required to decide when
further potential reductions in bias are outweighed by the cost
in variance. Nonetheless, maintaining the principle of separating design (the weighting model) from analysis (using outcome
data), the variance inflation due to model complexity can be
approximated by calculating the corresponding ratio for an estimated difference of weighted means assuming homoscedastic
data; from (8) this is estimated by
(1/n1 + 1/n0 )

nz

−1
z=0,1

i=1

2

nz

wzi2

wzi

,

i=1

based on the “design effect” approximation of Kish (1965).

(9)

393

4. Overlap Weighting
4.1. The Overlap Weights
As is generally recognized, ATE is inestimable if the supports
of the treatment groups are different, making balanced comparisons impossible in the region of support for only one group.
Furthermore, the value and indeed the finiteness of the variance
in (7) depends critically on the distribution of e(x) close to 0
and 1 unless the denominator e(x) · (1 − e(x)) is canceled by a
corresponding factor of h(x).
We define the overlap weights by letting h(x) = e(x)(1 −
e(x)), implying balancing weights
w1 (x) ∝ 1 − e(x),
w0 (x) ∝ e(x),

for Z = 1,
for Z = 0.

(10)

Following Corollary 1 and under its assumptions, the corresponding nonparametric estimator τ̂h has the minimum asymptotic variance among all balancing weights. Even if the outcomes
are moderately heteroscedastic, the overlap weights may have
good efficiency while depending only on design (covariate distributions in the treatment and control groups) and therefore
being defined prior to examining outcome data.
The overlap weights and the associated target population are
illustrated in Figure 1 for two univariate normal populations
with equal size and variance. The upper panel illustrates the target population density f (x)h(x), which is greatest where the
treated and control groups most overlap. Hence, we call the corresponding WATE estimand τh the average treatment effect for
the overlap population (ATO). The lower panel shows that the
ratio h(x) of target to combined population peaks where the
propensity score is 1/2, and these weights place more emphasis on units with propensity score close to 1/2, who could be in
either group, relative to those with propensity scores close to 0
or 1.
The overlap weights, unlike the IPWs, are bounded and thus
are less sensitive to extreme weights. Compared to the common
practice of truncating weights or discarding units, the overlap
weights are continuously defined and avoid arbitrary choice of a

Figure . Overlap weights for two normally distributed groups with diﬀerent means.
In the upper panel, the left and right solid lines, the thin and thick dashed lines represent the density of the covariate in the control, treated, combined (h(x) = 1), and
overlap weighted (h(x) = e(x)(1 − e(x))) populations, respectively. In the lower
panel, the two solid lines represent w0 (x), w1 (x) and the dashed line represents
h(x) = e(x)(1 − e(x)).

394

F. LI, K. MORGAN, AND A. ZASLAVSKY

cutoff for inclusion in the analysis, as illustrated in an application
in Section 5.3.
The variance-minimizing property of the overlap weighting implies that it adapts to any distribution of covariates and
propensities to define and answer the question that can be
best answered nonparametrically by the data at hand. These
include several familiar special cases: (1) if propensity to treatment is always small, ATO approximates ATT (for e(x) ≈ 0,
e(x)
)); (2) in the opposite case where
(1 − e(x), e(x)) ≈ (1, 1−e(x)
propensity to control is small, ATO approximates ATC; (3)
if treatment and control groups are nearly balanced in size
and distribution, ATO approximates ATE (for e(x) ≈ 1/2, (1 −
.25
.25
, 1−e(x)
)).
e(x), e(x)) ≈ ( e(x)
While the interpretation of the overlap distribution is specific to the application, the overlap population often represents
a target population of intrinsic substantive interest, that is, the
units whose combination of characteristics could appear with
substantial probability in either treatment group. For example,
in medicine, these may be patients for whom clinical consensus
is ambiguous or divided, who are said to be in equipoise between
treatments, so research on these patients may be most needed. In
social policy, these might be the units whose treatment assignment would be most responsive to a policy shift as new information is obtained. In general, we may want to estimate a treatment
effect or compare treatments on the subpopulation of units that
are the most similar between treatment groups.
Overlap weighting is in a sense asymptotically equivalent to
matching. Consider a sequence of increasingly large datasets
from some generating distribution. The weighting analyses
might be a sequence of increasingly complex models that converge to a saturated propensity score model with indicators
for each design point (or small neighborhood, for continuous
variables), while the matching criterion of closeness is correspondingly tightened to approach exact matching on the same
discrete design points or continuous neighborhoods. At this
limit, many-to-many matching would use weights equivalent
to the overlap weights estimated from the saturated propensity
score model. The overlap weights also have a natural connection to regression with fixed effects for each design point. If the
sample count for xi in group z = 0, 1 is nzi , the propensity score
is e(xi ) = n1i /(n0i + n1i ) and the total overlap weight for each
group and hence of τ̂ (xi ) is n0i n1i /(n0i + n1i ); however this is
exactly the precision weight attached to Ȳ1i − Ȳ0i in the fixedeffects OLS model Yzi = αi + zτ + zi .
4.2. Exact Balance
Overlap weights based on a logistic propensity score model also
have the following attractive small-sample exact balance property (proved in the Appendix).
Theorem 3. When the propensity scores are estimated by maximum likelihood under a logistic regression model, logit e(xi ) =
β0 + xi β , the overlap weights lead to exact balance in the means
of any included covariate between treatment and control groups.
That is,


i xik Zi (1 − êi )
i xik (1 − Zi )êi

= 
, for k = 1, . . . , K,
Z
(1
−
ê
)
i
i
i
i (1 − Zi )êi
(11)

where êi = {1 + exp[−(β̂0 + xi β̂ )]}−1 and β̂ = (β̂1 , . . . , β̂k ) is
the MLE for the regression coefficients.
While a main effects model guarantees exact equality
between groups for the mean of each included covariate, it is
advisable to improve balance by including additional derived
covariates, guided by prior anticipation of possible effects on
outcomes, as discussed at the end of Section 3. These may
include interactions and, for continuous variables, terms whose
mean balance implies better matching of distributions, such as
powers and products (to enforce equality of moments) or spline
terms. Note that the exact balance property applies for overlap weights with propensity scores calculated with the canonical link under any generalized linear model, including those
for multi-group comparisons, for example, multinomial logistic models for unordered categorical outcomes or nested logistic
models for ordinal outcomes.
Theorem 3 is distinct from the exact balance result in Graham, Pinto, and Egel (2012), which is on inverse probability
weights and does not provide the explicit form of the propensity score model that would guarantee exact balance.

4.3. Combining Matching and Weighting: The “Tudor
Solution”
Matching is the most widely used nonparametric adjustment
method in practice. Based on the exact balance property of the
overlap weights (Theorem 3), we propose a hybrid approach that
combines matching and weighting—the “Tudor solution”: (The
name “Tudor” evokes the Wars of the Roses (1455–1485), in
which the houses of Lancaster and York fought bitterly for the
throne of England but victory went to a relatively remote Lancastrian claimant, the House of Tudor, which through a strategic marriage ultimately united the claims of the rival houses.
Here it refers to the contention between weighting and matching in the statistical literature.) matching followed by an overlap weighting adjustment of the matched sample. In the first
step, a matched sample is created using any preferred approach
(e.g., Mahalanobis distance matching within propensity score
calipers). In the second step, propensity scores are estimated by
logistic regression within the matched sample. Finally, the treatment effect is estimated by applying the overlap weights to the
matched sample. This approach has the potential to combine the
benefits of matching (nearness of matched cases in multivariate space, including dimensions not controlled by the propensity
score model) and overlap weighting (exact balance for means of
covariates in model). An analogous use of substitution sampling
followed by regression adjustment in surveys was proposed by
Rubin and Zanutto (2002).
The Tudor solution might be most beneficial for highdimensional data, where considerable residual imbalance is
possible due to its typical local sparseness. Removing mean
imbalance also removes the component of bias that would
be estimated by a post-matching linear model, but has the
advantage of being conducted in the “design phase,” without
knowledge and possible manipulation of consequences for the
estimates (Rubin 2008).

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

5. Examples
5.1. Artificial Distributions
It is easy to construct examples in which the asymptotic variance
(7) of estimates using HT weights is infinite. For example, let
x ∼ Uniform(0, 1), so f (x) ≡ 1 and let e(x) = x.
Here, we illustratively compare HT, truncated HT (discarding units outside 0.1 < e < 0.9), and overlap weighting estimators under more plausible assumed distributions by calculating
variances of WATE estimates relative to the variance of the
unweighted difference of means under homoscedastic errors,
for selected univariate distributions F1 , F0 (Table 2). As required
by theory, variances with overlap weights are always the smallest.
In scenario (1), there is a modest shift of normal distributions;
the HT estimator loses efficiency due to extreme weights in the
tails, which are excluded by the truncated estimator. With the
larger shift between groups in scenario (2), the HT variance is
greatly inflated, but the truncated HT weighting removes most
of the extreme weights in the tails. In scenario (3), one sample
is much larger than the other, which skews the propensity score
distribution. This causes an excessive truncation of one tail of
that distribution, increasing the variance of the truncated HT
estimator. Adaptive modification of truncation points might
solve this problem, but no modifications are needed for the
overlap weighting estimator. In scenario (4), one group has
much larger variance, again inflating the HT variance, causing
an explosion of weights in the tails of the narrower distribution.
5.2. A Causal Comparison: Right Heart Catheterization
Right heart catheterization (RHC) is a diagnostic procedure for directly measuring cardiac function in critically ill
patients. Though useful for directing immediate and subsequent
treatment, RHC can cause serious complications. In an influential study, Connors et al. (1996) used propensity score matching to study the effectiveness of right heart catheterization
(RHC) with observational data from Murphy and Cluff (1990).
The study collected data on 5735 hospitalized adult patients
at five medical centers in the U.S., 2184 of them assigned to
the treatment (Zi = 1), receipt of RHC within 24 h of admission, and the remaining 3551 assigned to the control condition (Zi = 0). The outcome was survival at 30 days after
admission. Based on information from a panel of experts, a
rich set of variables potentially relating to the decision to use
RHC was collected. Connors et al. (1996) described the study,
which has been since intensively reanalyzed (e.g., Hirano and
Imbens 2001; Crump et al. 2009; Traskin and Small 2011;
Rosenbaum 2012). The dataset is publicly available on http://
biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/wiki/pub/Main/DataSets/rhc.html.

395

The comparison in the RHC study is causal in the sense
that the treatment—application of RHC—is manipulable (Rubin
1986). Among the 72 observed covariates (21 continuous, 25
binary, 26 dummy variables from breaking up 6 categorical
covariates), distributions of several key covariates differed substantially between the control and treatment groups (Hirano and
Imbens 2001, Table 2). For example, the treated group has a
much higher average APACHE (Acute Physiology and Chronic
Health Evaluation) score, signifying greater severity of disease
at admission. The majority of the treated units have propensity scores larger than 0.5 and the majority of the control units
have propensity scores smaller than 0.5 (Crump et al. 2009,
Figure 1). Most previous analyses focus on the ATT, that is,
the average causal effect of applying RHC for the patients who
received RHC. In this study, as argued by Rosenbaum (2012),
it would also be of interest to estimate the effects of RHC for
the “marginal” subjects, who might or might not have been
treated. Such estimates provide useful information for assigning treatments for the population with no clear propensity to a
group. Toward this goal, Rosenbaum (2012) proposed an optimal matching strategy to choose the matches with the most
treated subjects that have adequate balance; Crump et al. (2009)
limited the weighting analysis to a subsample with the estimated
propensity scores truncated to the interval [0.1, 0.9].
As in previous studies, we estimate the propensity score
under a logistic model with main effects of all the 72 covariates,
based on which we calculate the HT, ATT, and overlap weights.
We measure covariate mean balance for each covariate by the
absolute standardized bias (ASB):


N
 N xZw

 i=1 i i i
i=1 xi (1 − Zi )wi 
ASB =  N
− N



i=1 Zi wi
i=1 (1 − Zi )wi


s21 /N1 + s20 /N0 ,

(12)
where s2z is the variance of the unweighted covariate in group z
and Nz is the sample size in group z. For unweighted data, this
is the absolute value of the standard two-sample t-statistic. We
use an unweighted standard error in the denominator to allow
for fair comparisons across weighting methods: if the numerator
and denominator were both to vary with weighting method, a
smaller ASB could be due to either better covariate balance or an
increased standard error. We calculate the ASB for each covariate after applying the overlap, HT, and ATT weights, boxplots of
which are displayed in Figure 2. Each set of weights improves

Table . Variances of WATE estimators relative to variance of diﬀerence of
unweighted means, under homoscedasticity, and various covariate distributions.
Relative variance

()
()
()
()

F1

F0

n0 /n1

HT

HT(trunc)

Overlap

N(0, 1)
N(0, 1)
N(0, 1)
N(0, 1)

N(1, 1)
N(2, 1)
N(1, 1)
N(0, 202 )






.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

Figure . Boxplots for the absolute standardized diﬀerences for covariates under
each weighting method in the RHC study.

396

F. LI, K. MORGAN, AND A. ZASLAVSKY

Table . Estimates and standard errors obtained from diﬀerent methods. Estimates
using optimal truncation are from Crump et al. (), with estimated propensity score truncated between [0.1, 0.9] (sample size ). Estimates using optimal
matching are from Traskin and Small () based on  optimally matched pairs.
Standard errors are calculated via bootstrapping.
Unweighted Overlap
Estimate ×102
SE ×102

− .
.

HT

ATT

− . − . − .
.
.
.

Trunc. ATT Opt. match
− .
.

− .
.

mean balance compared to the unweighted data, but the overlap weights clearly lead to the best balance; in fact, here the ABS
is exactly 0 for each covariate using overlap weights, based on
Theorem 3.
The causal effects estimated from τ̂h using the three weights
are shown in Table 3. For comparison, we include results from
the method by Crump et al. (2009) for ATT weighting with
optimal truncation, and the optimal matching method of Rosenbaum (2012). The standard errors are estimated from the bootstrap procedure by Crump et al. (2009) with 5000 replicates.
All the estimates suggest that applying RHC leads to a higher
mortality rate than not applying RHC. Overlap weighting and
optimal truncation lead to the smallest standard errors. Overlap weighting and optimal matching give similar point estimates,
around 10% larger than those from the other methods.
To compare (truncated) weighting, matching, and the proposed “Tudor Solution,” we conduct a simulation study closely
mimicking the real RHC data. We retain the covariates and
the treatment variable; we generate the outcome from a linear regression model with the treatment and main effects of
the 72 covariates, with coefficients being the ones from fitting
such a model to the real data. We simulate 1000 replicates of
the data, each created by sampling with replacement 2184 and
3551 units from the treated and control group, respectively. We
focus on the ATT. For weighting, only units with a propensity
score between 0.1 and 0.9 are included. Absolute biases (in 10−2
scale) from the truncated weighting, matching and Tudor analyses are 1.10, 1.44, and 0.81, respectively, and root mean squared
errors (RMSEs) are 1.31, 1.75, and 1.01, respectively. The Tudor
solution significantly outperforms matching alone, resulting in
about 40% reduction in both bias and RMSE. This large gain
is not surprising given the high-dimensional covariates and the
underlying linear outcome model. The Tudor solution also outperforms truncated weighting, resulting in about 25% reduction
in both bias and RMSE.

5.3. A Descriptive Comparison: Racial Disparities in
Medical Expenditure
This analysis of racial disparities in medical expenditure uses
data similar to that by Lê Cook et al. (2010) for adult respondents
aged 18 and older to the 2009 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS); the dataset is publicly available on AHRQ’s website
(Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2012). The sample contains 10,130 non-Hispanic Whites (referred to as Whites
hereafter), 4224 Blacks, 1522 Asians, and 5558 Hispanics. The
goal is to estimate disparities in health care expenditure between
Whites and each minority group after balancing confounding
variables. To illustrate, we focus on two separate comparisons—
the White-Asian and White-Hispanic comparisons. Since race
is not manipulable, these comparisons are descriptive.
Here, focusing on ATT or ATE would force us to consider a
hypothetical target population with the covariate distribution of
a particular race or a “combined” White-minority population.
Even if such a population is not an infeasible target of inference
due to lack of overlap, it may lack policy relevance for studying disparities because it focuses on individuals atypical for their
own racial/ethnic group. For example, body mass index (BMI)
has a much longer and heavier right tail for Whites than for
Asians, so weighting Asians to have a BMI distribution of the
Whites creates an unrealistic population of Asians. Instead, we
choose the overlap weights with the goal of focusing on the naturally comparable subpopulation of people with similar characteristics: people who, based on their covariates, could easily be
either White or from the minority group.
There are 29 covariates (4 continuous, 25 binary), a mix of
health indicators and demographic variables. We estimate the
propensity scores via a logistic regression including all main
effects. For each comparison Z = 1 for Whites and Z = 0 for
minority individuals. The distributions of the estimated propensity scores for the White-Asian and White-Hispanic comparisons are shown in Figure 3. The White-Asian comparison has
severe lack of overlap, with the largest Asian HT normalized
weight being 0.32, meaning that one individual (out of 1522)
accounts for almost one third of the total weights of Asians. This
weight belongs to an Asian female with a very high BMI of 55.4
(the highest among Asians) and consequently a propensity score
close to 1. In contrast, the largest overlap normalized weight is
only 0.0008.
Figure 4 provides a closer look at the covariate BMI for
the White-Asian comparison, showing the unweighted and
weighted BMI distributions under each weighting scheme. This

Figure . Distribution of the estimated propensity scores for White-Asian and White-Hispanic comparisons in the MEPS data.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

397

Figure . Unweighted and weighted BMI distributions for the White and Asian groups in the MEPS data.

Figure . Boxplots for the absolute standardized diﬀerence for covariates under each weighting method.

illustrates the good balance achieved by the overlap weights, and
the bad balance and extreme weight placed on the highest Asian
BMI under the inverse probability weighting schemes.
Figure 5 shows boxplots of the ASB for all covariates under
each weighting method. As expected from Theorem 3, the
overlap weights always lead to perfect mean balance. For the
White-Hispanic comparison, HT and ATT weighting each substantially improved mean balance compared to the unweighted
data, although not as much as overlap weighting. For the WhiteAsian comparison, where there is serious lack of overlap in
covariates, HT and ATT weighting results in worse covariate balance than no weighting at all, yielding very large differences in
means for several covariates, including a difference of over 74
unweighted standard errors for the covariate BMI.
We estimate the weighted average controlled difference in
health care expenditure between races using the estimator τ̂h .
The results with bootstrap standard errors (from 1000 bootstrap samples) appear in Table 4. Estimates differ substantially
across weighting methods, especially when there is a serious
lack of overlap, as in the White-Asian comparison. For example, the average weighted difference in health care expenditure
between Whites and Asians is estimated to be $2772, $1302,
$2458, $2624 from the un-, overlap-, HT-, and ATT-weighted
methods, respectively. The IPW weighting methods make the
Asian disparity appear to be much greater than the Hispanic disparity, while this difference is negligible when using the overlap
Table . Weighted mean diﬀerences in total health care expenditure (dollars) in
.
Unweighted (se) Overlap (se)
White-Asian
White-Hispanic

. (.)
. (.)

HT (se)

ATT (se)

. (.) . (.) . (.)
. (.) . (.) . (.)

Table . HT weighted mean diﬀerences (White-Hispanic) in total health care
expenditure (dollars) in  after truncating or discarding units with extreme
propensity scores.
Estimated propensity score range kept

Truncate
Discard

[,]

[., .]

[., .]

[., .]













weights. Overlap weighting focuses on the population where the
Whites and minority groups have the most similar characteristics, and gives the smallest standard error in all the comparisons.
The common practice of discarding or truncating units with
propensity scores close to 0 or 1 can make estimates very dependent on the truncation cutoff. We illustrate this by using HT
weights after such truncation or discarding to estimate WhiteHispanic disparities. These results in Table 5 show estimates
changing more than two-fold based on the cutoff choice. In
contrast, the overlap weights avoid this artificial truncation or
discarding, and rather continuously and automatically downweight units with extreme propensity scores.

6. Discussion and Extensions
Covariate balance between comparison groups is central to
causal and unconfounded descriptive studies. In this article,
we propose a unified framework for the class of weights—the
balancing weights—that balance covariates. Several familiar
types of weights, such as the HT and ATT weights, are special
cases. Within this class, we advocate the overlap weights, which
optimize the efficiency of comparisons by defining the population with the most overlap in the covariates between treatment
groups. This weighting method is easy to implement with

398

F. LI, K. MORGAN, AND A. ZASLAVSKY

standard software and has been used in a number of applications. Though the overlap weights are statistically motivated, we
argue that the corresponding target population and estimand
are often of scientific or policy interest. Our method differs
from several published methods for automated covariate balancing (e.g., Hainmueller 2012; Graham, Pinto, and Egel 2012;
Imai and Ratkovic 2014) that identify estimates of propensity
scores (weights) under certain criterion (e.g., moment conditions). Rather, we identify a target population that minimizes
asymptotic conditional variance of the treatment effect without
preliminary “peeking” at the outcome data, as by Crump et al.
(2006), and then identify additional properties, salutary in
applications, of the corresponding weights.
The results of Section 3 readily extend under the same
assumptions to optimizing a common target distribution
f (x)h(x) for comparisons of J > 2 groups (Imbens 2000; Imai
are condiand van Dyk 2004). Suppose e j (x), j = 1, . . . , J 
tional probabilities of assignment to group j, with
e j (x) =
1, and that the objective is to minimize the sum of the variances of weighted group means. Then the balancing weights are
w j (x) = h(x)/e j (x), and under the conditions of Corollary 1

τh =



if the combined weights wS (xi )Wi are more variable than the
propensity-score weights from the unweighted model wU (xi ).
Furthermore, with weighted data the variance estimator and
optimality arguments in Section 3 must be modified because
the variance of the weighting estimator is no longer dependent
only on sample size, but also on the weight distribution. Similar
issues apply to the method by Zanutto (2006), which combines
unweighted subclassification modeling with weighted estimation of subclass means. A lively stream of current research aims
to recover information from the weights without the inefficiency
of the standard weighted analysis (Zheng and Little 2005); these
approaches might be productively applied to propensity-score
weighting.

Appendix: Proof of Theorems
In what follows, we assume regularity conditions on v z and E[Y (z) |
X] necessary to make the integrals defined and convergent.
Proof of Theorem 1. The WATE for the population with density proportional to f (x)h(x) with respect to base measure μ is defined as


τ (x) f (x)h(x)μ(dx)
f (x)h(x)μ(dx)

EY,Z|X {Y (1)Z[h(x)/e(x)] − Y (0)(1 − Z)[h(x)/(1 − e(x))]} f (x)μ(dx)

h(x) f (x)μ(dx)


EY,Z|X Y (1)Z[h(x)/e(x)] f (x)μ(dx)
EY,Z|X Y0 (1 − Z)[h(x)/e(x)] f (x)μ(dx)

=
− 
,
EZ|X Z[h(x)/e(x)] f (x)μ(dx)
EZ|X (1 − Z)[h(x)/e(x)] f (x)μ(dx)
=


they are optimized for h(x) ∝ ( 1/e j (x))−1 . Extensions to
(known) heteroscedasticity or to an unequally weighted objective function are straightforward. However, comparison of
multiple groups allows consideration of a larger selection of
propensity score model specifications than the two-group
comparison, as well as different sets of comparisons of interest.
Heuristically, h(·) gives the most relative weight to the covariate regions in which none of the e j (·) are close to zero. With
multiple groups this region of joint overlap might be small or
nonexistent, even if all the pairwise overlaps are substantial.
Thus, the suitability of weighting to a common distribution
depends on the specifics of covariate distributions, models,
and scientific objectives of the analysis. Similar issues arise in
matching of multiple groups.
Propensity-weighting methods can be readily extended to
incorporate sampling weights (DuGoff, Schuler, and Stuart
2014), which is arguably an advantage over the matching methods. In one common approach, the propensity score model
eS (x) is estimated using sampling-weighted estimators, and then
observation i with sampling weight Wi and corresponding balancing weight wS (xi ) is weighted by wS (xi )Wi , where wS (xi ) =
h(xi )/es (xi ) for Zi = 1, wS (xi ) = h(xi )/(1 − es (xi )) for Zi = 0.
The weighted sample distribution is an unbiased and consistent estimator of the finite population distribution, and the estimation procedure (propensity score weighting) is consistent
when applied to the finite population. On the other hand, the
sampling-weighted estimator is likely to have increased variance

(A.1)

where τ (x) = E[Y (1) − Y (0) | X = x], and using the unconfoundedness assumption that Y (1), Y (0) ⊥ Z | X. The terms of
(A.1) can be read as expectations of weighted means of Y (z) in samples drawn from the population with density f (x), respectively, for
the strata with z = 1 or z = 0. Replacing expectations by sample
means, and substituting weight expressions from (4), we obtain the
following estimator for the sample WATE:


Yi (0)(1 − Zi )w0 (xi )
i Yi (1)Zi w1 (xi )
τ̂h = 
− i
,
Z
w
(x
)
i i 1 i
i (1 − Zi )w0 (xi )

(A.2)

where each summation (divided by n) is an unbiased estimator of
the corresponding integral in (A.1); therefore by Slutsky’s theorem

τ̂h is a consistent estimator of τh .
Proof of Theorem 2. Conditional on the sample X = {x1 , . . . , xn }
and Z = {z1 , . . . , zn }, only Yi is random in (A.2), so the variance
of the estimator τ̂h is
V[τ̂h | X, z]


2
2
i v 1 (xi )zi w1 (xi )
i v 0 (xi )(1 − zi )w0 (xi )
= 
2 + 
2
i zi w1 (xi )
i (1 − zi )w0 (xi )

2
v 1 (xi )[zi /e(xi )][h(xi ) /e(xi )]
= i 
2
i [zi /e(xi )]h(xi )

v 0 (xi )[(1 − zi )/(1 − e(xi ))][h(xi )2 /(1 − e(xi ))]
+ i
.
2

i [(1 − zi )/(1 − e(xi ))]h(xi )

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION

Averaging the above first over the distribution of Z (using
E[Zi /e(xi )] = E[(1 − Zi )(1 − e(xi ))] = 1), and then over the distribution of X, and again applying Slutsky’s theorem, we have

v 0 (x)
v 1 (x)
n · Ex V[τ̂h | X] →
+
h(x)2 f (x)μ(dx)
e(x)
1 − e(x)
2
 
×
f (x)h(x)μ(dx) .
 


Proof of Corollary 1. For simplicity, we use E[·] to denote
· f (x)μ(dx). According to the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we
have


2

h(x)
e(x)(1 − e(x))
[E {h(x)}] = E √
e(x)(1 − e(x))

h2 (x)
≤E
E [e(x)(1 − e(x))] ,
e(x)(1 − e(x))
2

√
h(x)
∝ e(x)(1 − e(x)),
and the equality is attained when √e(x)(1−e(x))
that is, when h(x) ∝ e(x)(1 − e(x)). Corollary 1 follows directly
from applying the above to the right-hand side of (8).

Proof of Theorem 3. The score functions of the logistic propensity
score model, logit{e(xi )} = β0 + xi β with β = (β1 , . . . , βK ), are:
∂ log L
=
∂βk

xik (Zi − êi ),

for k = 0, 1, . . . , K,

i

where x0k ≡ 1 and êi = [1 + exp(−xi β )]−1 . Equating to 0 and
solving, the MLE β̂ satisfies
Zi =

êi ,

xik Zi =

and

xik êi .

It follows that
Zi (1 − êi ) =

êi −

i

Zi êi =

êi (1 − Zi ),

i

xik Zi (1 − êi ) =

xik êi −

i

xik Zi êi =

xik êi (1 − Zi ),

i

for,

k = 1, . . . , K.



Therefore, for any k = 1, . . . , K, we have


i xik Zi (1 − êi )
i xik (1 − Zi )êi

.
= 
Z
(1
−
ê
)
i
i i
i (1 − Zi )êi



Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the associate editor and two anonymous reviewers for comments that help improve the clarity and exposition of the article,
to Peng Ding for insightful discussions, particularly the proof of Corollary
1, to Dylan Small for sharing the programming code for the RHC study, and
to Maggie Nguyen for computational assistance.

Funding
Li and Morgan’s research is partially funded by NSF-SES grant 1424688.

399

References
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2012), “MEPS HC-129: 2009
Full Year Consolidated Data File,” available at meps.ahrq.gov/data_
stats/download_data_files_detail.jsp?cboPufNumber=HC-132. [396]
Busso, M., DiNardo, J., and McCrary, J. (2014), “New Evidence on the Finite
Sample Properties of Propensity Score Reweighting and Matching Estimators,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96, 885–897. [391]
Connors, A. F., Speroff, T., Dawson, N. V., Thomas, C., Harrell, F. E.,
Wagner, D., Desbiens, N., Goldman, L., Wu, A. W., Califf, R. M., Fulkerson, W. J., Vidaillet, H., Broste, S., Bellamy, P., Lynn, J., and Knaus,
W. A. (1996), “The Effectiveness of Right Heart Catheterization in the
Initial Care of Critically Ill Patients,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 276, 889–897. [395]
Crump, R. K., Hotz, V. J., Imbens, G. W., and Mitnik, O. A. (2006), “Moving
the Goalposts: Addressing Limited Overlap in the Estimation of Average Treatment Effects by Changing the Estimand,” Technical Report
330, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Available at http://www.nber.org/papers/T0330. [391,392,398]
——— (2009), “Dealing With Limited Overlap in Estimation of Average
Treatment Effects,” Biometrika, 96, 187–199. [390,391,392,395]
Dehejia, R., and Wahba, S. (1999), “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental
Studies: Reevaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 94, 1053–1062. [392]
DuGoff, E. H., Schuler, M., and Stuart, E. A. (2014), “Generalizing Observational Study Results: Applying Propensity Score Methods to Complex
Surveys,” Health Service Research, 49, 284–303. [398]
Graham, B. S., Pinto, C., and Egel, D. (2012), “Inverse Probability Tilting
for Moment Condition Models with Missing Data,” Review of Economic
Studies, 79, 1053–1079. [394,398]
Hahn, J. (1998), “On the Role of the Propensity Score in Efficient Semiparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 66,
315–331. [390]
Hainmueller, J. (2012), “Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: Multivariate
Reweighting Method to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational
Studies,” Political Analysis, 20, 25–46. [398]
Hirano, K., and Imbens, G. W. (2001), “Estimation of Causal Effects Using
Propensity Score Weighting: An Application to Data on Right Heart
Catheterization,” Health Services and Outcomes Research Methodology,
2, 259–278. [390,395]
Hirano, K., Imbens, G. W., and Ridder, G. (2003), “Efficient Estimation
of Average Treatment Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score,”
Econometrica, 71, 1161–1189. [390,392,393]
Horvitz, D. G., and Thompson, D. J. (1952), “A Generalization of Sampling
Without Replacement From a Finite Universe,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 47, 663–685. [390]
Hosmer, D. W., and Lemeshow, S. (1980), “A Goodness-of-Fit Test for the
Multiple Logistic Regression Model,” Communications in Statistics, 9,
1043–1069. [393]
Imai, K., and Ratkovic, M. (2014), “Covariate Balancing Propensity Score,”
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 76, 243–263. [398]
Imai, K., and van Dyk, D. A. (2004), “Causal Inference With General Treatment Regimes: Generalizing the Propensity Score,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 99, 854–866. [398]
Imbens, G. W. (2000), “The Role of the Propensity Score in Estimating
Dose-Response Functions,” Biometrika, 87, 706–710. [398]
——— (2004), “Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects
Under Exogeneity: A Review,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
86, 4–29. [390,392]
Imbens, G. W., and Rubin, D. B. (2015), Causal Inference for Statistics, Social,
and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction, New York: Cambridge University Press. [391]
Imbens, G. W., and Wooldridge, J. M. (2009), “Recent Developments in the
Econometrics of Program Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature,
47, 5–86. [390]
Kish, L. (1965), Survey Sampling, New York: Wiley. [393]
Lê Cook, B., McGuire, T. G., Lock, K., and Zaslavsky, A. M. (2010), “Comparing Methods of Racial and Ethnic Disparities Measurement Across
Different Settings of Mental Health Care,” Health Services Research, 45,
825–847. [396]

400

F. LI, K. MORGAN, AND A. ZASLAVSKY

Li, F., Landrum, M. B., and Zaslavsky, A. M. (2013), “Propensity Score
Weighting With Multilevel Data,” Statistics in Medicine, 32, 3373–3387.
[391]
Li, L., and Greene, T. (2013), “A Weighting Analogue to Pair Matching in
Propensity Score Analysis,” International Journal of Biostatistics, 9, 1–
20. [390,392]
Manski, C. F. (1990), “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects,” American Economic Review, 80, 319–323. [390]
Murphy, D. J., and Cluff, L. E. (1990), “SUPPORT: Study to Understand
Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments,”
Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 43, S1–S123. [395]
Robins, J., and Rotnitzky, A. (1995), “Semiparametric Efficiency in Multivariate Regression Models With Missing Data,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 90, 122–129. [390]
Robins, J. M., Hernan, M. A., and Brumback, B. (2000), “Marginal Structural Models and Causal Inference in Epidemiology,” Epidemiology, 11,
550–560. [390]
Rosenbaum, P. R. (1987), “Model-Based Direct Adjustment,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 82, 387–394. [393]
——— (2012), “Optimal Matching of an Optimally Chosen Subset in Observational Studies,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 21,
57–71. [390,395,396]
Rosenbaum, P. R., and Rubin, D. B. (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70,
41–55. [391]
Rubin, D. B. (1974), “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology,
66, 688–701. [391]
——— (1978), “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of Randomization,” The Annals of Statistics, 6, 34–58. [391]

——— (1979), “Using Multivariate Matched Sampling and Regression
Adjustment to Control Bias in Observational Studies,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 74, 318–324. [390]
——— (1980), Comment on “Randomization Analysis of Experimental
Data: The Fisher Randomization Test” by D. Basu, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75, 591–593. [391]
——— (1986), “Which Ifs Have Causal Answers: Comment on “Statistics
and Causal Inference” by P.W. Holland,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 961–962. [395]
——— (2008), “For Objective Causal Inference, Design Trumps Analysis,”
Annals of Applied Statistics, 2, 808–840. [394]
Rubin, D. B., and Zanutto, E. (2002), “Using Matched Substitutes to Adjust
for Nonignorable Nonresponse Through Multiple Imputations,” in
Survey Nonresponse, eds. R. Groves, D. Dillman, R. Little, and J. Eltinge,
New York: Wiley, pp. 389–402. [394]
Schneider, E. C., Cleary, P. D., Zaslavsky, A. M., and Epstein, A.
M. (2001), “Racial Disparity in Influenza Vaccination: Does
Managed Care Narrow the Gap Between African Americans
and Whites?” Journal of the American Medical Association, 286,
1455–1460. [391]
Traskin, M., and Small, D. (2011), “Defining the Study Population for an
Observational Study to Ensure Sufficient Overlap: A Tree Approach,”
Statistics in Biosciences, 3, 94–118. [391,395]
Zanutto, E. (2006), “A Comparison of Propensity Score and Linear
Regression of Complex Survey Data,” Journal of Data Science, 4,
67–91. [398]
Zheng, H., and Little, R. J. A. (2005), “Inference for the Population Total
From Probability-Proportional-to-Size Samples Based on Predictions
from a Penalized Spline Nonparametric Model,” Journal of Official
Statistics, 21, 1–20. [398]

