Exp Econ (2011) 14:439–457
DOI 10.1007/s10683-011-9275-7

So you want to run an experiment, now what?
Some simple rules of thumb for optimal experimental
design
John A. List · Sally Sadoff · Mathis Wagner

Received: 10 September 2008 / Accepted: 25 January 2010 / Published online: 18 March 2011
© Economic Science Association 2011

Abstract Experimental economics represents a strong growth industry. In the past
several decades the method has expanded beyond intellectual curiosity, now meriting consideration alongside the other more traditional empirical approaches used in
economics. Accompanying this growth is an influx of new experimenters who are in
need of straightforward direction to make their designs more powerful. This study
provides several simple rules of thumb that researchers can apply to improve the efficiency of their experimental designs. We buttress these points by including empirical
examples from the literature.
Keywords Experimental design
JEL Classification C90
1 Introduction
Ever since economists became engaged in the data business, they have grappled with
how to construct the proper counterfactual. The concept of identifying a treatment
effect is simple enough conceptually, but in practice a major problem is one of a
missing counterfactual—a person is not observed in more than one state simultaneously. Within economics, measurement approaches can be divided into two main
J.A. List · S. Sadoff ()
University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
e-mail: sadoff@uchicago.edu
J.A. List
NBER, Cambridge, MA, USA
M. Wagner
Department of Economics, Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467,
USA

440

J.A. List et al.

categories: estimation of models that make use of naturally-occurring data and approaches wherein the analyst herself governs the data generation process. A handful
of popular empirical approaches are typically used when the analyst is dealing with
naturally-occurring data, but the literature is replete with criticisms of their identifying assumptions, many times based on restrictiveness or implausibility (see Blundell
and Costa Dias 2002, for a useful review).
In those cases where the analyst generates her own data, such as within the area of
experimental economics, identification assumptions are much less severe. To obtain
the effect of treatment in the particular domain of study the only major assumption
necessary is appropriate randomization (with appropriate sample sizes). In this manner, when running an experiment the analyst is using randomization as an instrumental variable (see List 2006). But with the chore of data generation comes other, less
discussed, obligations of the researcher. In this study, we consider one such feature
more carefully: the optimal number and arrangement of subjects into experimental
cells.
A casual perusal of the literature presents a striking consistency concerning sample sizes and their arrangement: most studies uniformly distribute at least 30 subjects
into each cell. This approach holds whether the analyst is making use of a purely
dichotomous treatment (i.e., pill or no pill) as well as when the analyst is exploring levels of treatment (i.e., various dosage levels). Discussion of whether such a
sample arrangement is efficient is more mature in other literatures, but has not been
properly vetted in the experimental economics community. Our paper attempts to fill
this gap. In doing so, we do not claim originality in any of the derivations; rather,
this study should be viewed as a compilation of insights from other literatures that
might help experimenters in economics and related fields design more efficient experiments.1
Our study begins with a discussion of popular randomization techniques. We discuss the virtues of complete randomization, block designs, and factorial designs.2
After these randomization preliminaries, we move to a discussion of the power of the
experimental design. We provide simple formulas with which to compute required
sample sizes under three major classes of assumptions: (1) a dichotomous treatment
with potentially heterogeneous treatment effects (for continuous and binomial outcomes), (2) a dichotomous treatment in a cluster design, and (3) a continuous treatment with homogeneous treatment effects. We elaborate on these simple formulas in
cases where the cost of sampling subjects differs across treatment and control and
where there is a fixed cost of sampling from a new cluster.
Several simple rules of thumb fall out of the discussion. The overarching idea
revolves around first implementing an experimental design that maximizes the variance of the treatment variable, and second adjusting the samples to account for variance heterogeneity, if necessary. In the case of a simple comparison between a single
treatment and a control group, one first insight is that with a continuous outcome
measure, under the null hypothesis of no treatment effect, one should only allocate
subjects equally across treatment and control if the sample variances of the outcome
1 See Duflo et al. (2007) and Spybrook et al. (2009) for papers that cover similar ground.
2 Fisher (1935) and Cochran and Cox (1950) provide seminal discussions of experimental design.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

441

means are expected to be equal in the treatment and control groups (i.e., in those
cases when there are homogeneous treatment effects). The optimal sample arrangement becomes more lopsided as the sample variances of outcomes across treatment
and control become more disparate; or likewise, the treatment effect becomes more
heterogeneous. A simple rule of thumb to maximize power given a fixed experimental budget naturally follows: the ratio of the sample sizes is equal to the ratio of the
standard deviations of outcomes.
In cases when the outcome variable is dichotomous, under the null hypothesis of
no treatment effect (i.e., the means of the outcome variable are equal across treatment
and control), one should always allocate subjects equally across treatments. This follows from the close connection between mean and variance in the binomial outcome
case. Yet, if the null hypothesis postulates unequal means (and thus unequal variances across treatment and control), then the sample size arrangement is dictated in
the same manner as in the continuous case. If the cost of sampling subjects differs
across treatment and control groups, then the ratio of the sample sizes is inversely
proportional to the square root of the relative costs. Interestingly, differences in sampling costs have exactly the same effect on relative sample sizes of treatment and
control groups as differences in variances.
In those instances where the unit of randomization is different from the unit of observation, special considerations must be paid to correlated outcomes. Specifically,
the optimal size of each cluster increases with the ratio of the within to between cluster standard deviation, and decreases with the square root of the ratio of the cost of
sampling a subject to the fixed cost of sampling from a new cluster. Since the optimal sample size is independent of the available budget, the experimenter should
first determine how many subjects to sample in each cluster and then sample from
as many clusters as the budget permits (or until the optimal total sample size is
achieved).
A final class of results pertains to designs that include several levels of treatment,
or more generally when the treatment variable itself is continuous, but we assume
homogeneous treatment effects. The primary goal of the experimental design in this
case is to simply maximize the variance of the treatment variable. For example, if
the analyst is interested in estimating the effect of treatment and has strong priors
that the treatment has a linear effect, then the sample should be equally divided on
the endpoints of the feasible treatment range, with no intermediate points sampled.
Maximizing the variance of the treatment variable under an assumed quadratic, cubic, quartic, etc., relationship produces unambiguous allocation rules as well: in the
quadratic case, for instance, the analyst should place half of the sample equally distributed on the endpoints and the other half on the midpoint. More generally, optimal
design requires that the number of treatment cells used should be equal to the highest
polynomial order plus one.
The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews several basic
randomization techniques. We summarize how to calculate optimal sample sizes in
Section 3. Section 4 elaborates on these considerations, and includes formulas for binomial outcomes and cluster designs. Section 5 discusses sample arrangement when
varying treatment levels are possible. Section 6 concludes.

442

J.A. List et al.

2 Randomization techniques
One key feature that differentiates empirical approaches within economics is how
they formulate the proper counterfactual, or estimate the treatment effect of interest.
To provide some formalization, we consider the outcome Yi of subject i under treatment and control, T = 0 and T = 1, respectively. We assume that it can be modeled
as a function of observable variables Xi , an unobserved person-specific effect αi , an
average treatment effect τ̄ , a person-specific treatment effect τi , where E(τi ) = 0,
and εi , which is assumed independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
YiT = αi + Xi β + τ̄ T + τi T + εi

(1)

The average treatment effect can then be defined as
τ̄ = E(Yi1 − Yi0 ) = E(Yi1 ) − E(Yi0 )
The identification problem is that we can only observe E(Yi1 | T = 1) and E(Yi0 |
T = 0), where T = 1 or T = 0 for a given i. Because it is impossible to observe
unit i in both states (i.e., we cannot observe E(Yi1 | T = 0) and E(Yi0 | T = 1)), it is
necessary to construct a proper counterfactual. If the propensity to receive treatment
is correlated with any of the unobserved variables, then the estimate of the average
treatment effect is biased since
τ̂ = E(Yi1 | T = 1) − E(Yi0 | T = 0) = E(Yi1 ) − E(Yi0 ) = τ̄
The approach used by experimentalists typically achieves identification via randomization. The experimenter randomly assigns units to receive exposure or nonexposure to treatment and then compares the outcomes of units that received treatment to the outcomes of units that did not receive treatment. Randomization ensures
that the assignment to treatment is independent of other sources of variation, and
that any bias is balanced across treatment and control groups, thus ensuring that the
estimate of the average treatment effect is unbiased (for the subject pool).3
However, as Levitt and List (2009) discuss, one potential problem arising from
any randomization approach is “randomization bias,” a situation wherein the experimental sample is not representative of the population of interest due to the randomization itself. This problem emanates from the field of clinical drug trials, where it
has been found that persuading patients to participate in randomized studies is much
harder than persuading them to participate in non-randomized studies (Kramer and
Shapiro 1984). In principle, randomization bias also might influence experiments in
economics. In particular, laboratory experiments as well as artefactual and framed
field experiments might suffer from randomization bias (see Harrison and List 2004).
The one study that we are aware of that explores this issue is the work of Harrison
et al. (2009). Using an artefactual field experiment to explore risk preferences, they
find that “randomization bias is not a major empirical problem for field experiments
3 See Rubin (1978), Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) and Holland (1986) for further discussion of the causal

model outlined here.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

443

of the kind we conducted. . .” (p. 1). Certainly more work is necessary, but our intuition is that randomization bias will not present itself as a major impediment to
measurement in the same manner observed in clinical drug trials.
Below we discuss how, given that sample sizes in experiments are always of limited size, the experimenter should assign treatment. There is a large statistical literature on this issue, thus we aim to present a succinct overview of the main methods and
their advantages and disadvantages. It should be highlighted that our discussion will
continue to focus on measuring average treatment effects, which has consumed much
of the experimental literature. This is because it is in the spirit of classical experimental design; yet we should note that this leaves important issues on the sidelines,
such as heterogeneity of treatment effects (see List 2006, for a general discussion,
and Loomes 2005 and Wilcox 2008 for studies that reveal the repercussions of this
choice in measuring expected utility violations). More broadly, we urge caveat lector
because in some cases the principles for choosing optimal designs might differ from
the principles considered here. Kanninen (2002) provides a beautiful illustration of
this fact when the goal is to measure the parameters of a binomial logit model.
2.1 Block and within subject designs
The simplest experimental design is a completely randomized design, where treatments are probabilistically assigned to subjects independent of any of the subject’s
observed or unobserved characteristics. The advantage of this procedure is that it
minimizes the risk that treatment is correlated with individual characteristics. The
disadvantage is that the variance of outcomes is potentially very large and the sample
sizes of treatment and control groups are randomly generated. Both of these problems
reduce the experimenter’s ability to draw statistical inference from the experiment.
Instead, if the subject pool is heterogeneous in various dimensions the experimenter may want to reduce the variance of the unobserved component. This can be
done subsequent to the experiment by including observable variables Xi in a linear regression and thus constructing an estimate of the average treatment effect with lower
variance in finite samples. Alternatively, the conditioning can be built into the design
of the experiment. The basic strategy used for incorporating subject heterogeneity
into the design of an experiment is to divide the experimental units into blocks. The
idea is to treat heterogeneous characteristics of subjects as further treatments. Randomization is within, but not between blocks, thus ensuring that all treatment effects,
including the effect of subject characteristics, can be identified. Note that blocking,
or equivalently including observable variables in the subsequent regression, will typically decrease the variance of the estimate of the average treatment effect. Specifically, note that
var(τ̂ ) =

σ2
var(ε)
=
N
N · var(T )

(2)

The variance of the estimate of the average treatment effect σ 2 /N is increasing in
the variance of the unobserved component var(ε), and decreasing in the number of

444

J.A. List et al.

observations N and the variance of the treatment propensity var(T ).4 Blocking or
conditioning on X increases efficiency by reducing the variance of the unobserved
component. Another advantage is that blocking allows estimation of an average treatment effect over subsamples of the subject pool. In this case, there is a distinct benefit
from blocking prior to the experiment since one can ensure that the standard error of
the estimate of the treatment effect for each subsample is as small as possible, as
discussed below.
A within subject experimental design, in which the same subject experiences more
than one experimental treatment, can be thought of as a special case of the block design where the experimenter blocks on a single subject. A main advantage of the
within subject design is that it may greatly reduce the variance of the unobserved
component, increasing the precision of the estimated average treatment effect. Specifically, assuming that outcomes are generated by (1) then, conditional on X, the difference in the variance of the estimate of the treatment effect in a between subjects
and a within subject design is given by:
2
2
− σWS
=
σBS

2
var (αi )
N

2 and σ 2 are, respectively, the conditional between and within subject
where σBS
WS
variance.5 In addition, fewer subjects have to be recruited for a within subject design
and the degrees of freedom are larger. A disadvantage of the within subject design is
that treating a single subject multiple times may result in complicated interactions between treatments and thus yield a different parameter than is estimated in the between
experimental design. These context effects include history and learning effects, and
sensitization to perceived dependencies across trials (see Greenwald 1976). Some of
these more complicated effects can be controlled for using crossover designs, where
the order in which treatments are applied to a subject is randomized. For example, if
the outcome is determined by equation

Yit = Xit β + τ̄ T + τi T + γ̄ T(t−1) + γi T(t−1) + εi
then applying treatment T and control C in the order T C and CT allows for identification of τ̄ . More complicated interactions may be identified under a more elaborate
T CT and CT C crossover design to achieve identification. However, even the most
4 More generally, var(τ̂ ) =

var(ε)
2 ) . But since treatment is assigned at random, X and T are
N ·var(T )·(1−RXT

2 (the R-squared of a regression of T on X) is equal to zero.
uncorrelated so that RXT

5 The within subject design, however, does not in general have to result in a lower variance of the estimate

of the treatment effect. If we allow for individual fixed effects and the treatment effects to be correlated:
YiT = αi + Xi β + τ̄ T + τi T + ατij T + εi
then
2 − σ2 =
σBS
WS


2
var(αi ) − var(ατij )
n

which is no longer unambiguously positive. See Keren (1993) for a derivation of these results and an
overview of factors that influence the choice in between or within subject design.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

445

ingenious within subject designs potentially suffer from the problem that treatments
may interact in unexpected ways. This issue in and of itself merits an entire study, but
we close the discussion urging scholars to take caution when interpreting treatment
effects measured using within subject designs.
2.2 Factorial designs
A completely random or random block design has the disadvantage that sample sizes
may vary considerably across blocks. In a factorial design the experimenter chooses
a pre-determined number of subjects to each combination of treatments, which can
greatly increase the efficiency of the design. Randomization in this case is over the
order in which treatments are assigned to experimental units. For example, subjects
should not be assigned to treatment and control groups in the order in which they
arrive at the laboratory, since early and late arrivals may differ systematically. Instead,
each subject should be assigned a random number, based upon which assignment to
treatment or control is carried out.
A basic factorial design has the same number of subjects assigned to each combination of treatments. Further, it is likely to be expensive to run all possible combinations of treatments: with n treatments this would require 2n trials. However, in
the absence of interaction effects between treatments, only n + 1 trials are necessary
to identify all treatment effects. These n + 1 trials must be linearly independent to
guarantee that all treatment effects can be identified. The advantage of this fractional
factorial design approach is a reduced number of trials. A major disadvantage is that
in its simplest form such an approach renders it impossible to check for the existence
of interaction effects. Moreover, as we discuss below, the basic factorial design, with
equal sample sizes in each treatment cell, is likely to be inefficient.

3 Optimal sample arrangement: basics
Given a randomization scheme an important issue to consider is the optimal sample
size in each treatment cell. In calculating optimal sample sizes an experimenter must
consider three key elements: (1) the significance level, (2) the power of the subsequent
hypothesis test, and (3) the minimum detectable effect size. The significance level of
a hypothesis test is the probability of falsely rejecting the null hypothesis (also known
as the probability of a Type I error). The power of a statistical test is the probability
that it will correctly lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis (the probability of a
Type II error is 1-power, and is equal to the probability of falsely not rejecting the
null hypothesis).6 The effect size is the magnitude of the treatment effect that the
experimenter wants to detect.
6 Discussions of power tend not to be intuitively appealing to economists. This is because our usual ap-

proach stems from the standard regression model: under a true null what is the probability of observing
the coefficient that we observed? Power calculations are altogether different, exploring the question of: if
the alternative hypothesis is true, then what is the probability that the estimated coefficient lies outside the
confidence interval defined under the null.

446

J.A. List et al.

In this section we derive an explicit formula for experiments that have a dichotomous treatment, where the outcome is continuous and we assume that a t-test will
be used to determine differences in means between the treatment and control group.7
The formula illustrates the trade-offs inherent in the choices that experimenters face
and we make these more tangible by providing empirical examples. In subsequent
sections we consider further cases: binomial outcomes, cluster designs, and varying
treatment intensities. We also discuss cases where sampling costs for treatment and
control are unequal and where the cost of an additional subject in a new cluster is not
the same as that of a subject in a cluster that has already been sampled. In practice,
an experimenter can draw upon statistical software to help calculate sample sizes if
different hypothesis tests are to be used.8
3.1 Dichotomous treatment and continuous outcome
Using the empirical specification above, a single treatment T results in (conditional) outcomes Yi0 if T = 0 where Yi0 |Xi ∼ N (μ0 , σ02 ) and Yi1 if T = 1 where
Yi1 |Xi ∼ N(μ1 , σ12 ). In the model given by (1) σ12 − σ02 = var(τ |X). Only if the variance of the individual specific treatment effects equals zero, i.e., the treatment effect
is homogeneous, will the variances across treatment and control groups be equal.
Since the experiment has not yet been conducted, the experimenter must form beliefs
about the variances of outcomes across the treatment and control groups, which may,
for example, come from theory, prior empirical evidence, or a pilot experiment. The
experimenter also has to make a decision about the minimum detectable difference
between mean control and treatment outcomes, μ1 − μ0 = δ, that the experiment is
meant to be able to detect. In essence, δ is the minimum average treatment effect,
τ̄ , that the experiment will be able to detect at a given significance level and power.
Finally, we assume that the significance of the treatment effect will be determined
using a t-test.
Calculating optimal sample sizes requires specifying a null hypothesis and a specific alternative hypothesis. Typically, the null hypothesis is that there is no treatment
effect, i.e., that the effect size is zero. The alternative hypothesis is that the effect size
takes on a specific value (the minimum detectable effect size). The idea behind the
choice of optimal sample sizes in this scenario is that the sample sizes have to be just
large enough so that the experimenter (1) does not falsely reject the null hypothesis
that the population treatment and control outcomes are equal, i.e., commit a Type I
error; and (2) does not falsely accept the null hypothesis when the actual difference is
equal to δ, i.e. commit a Type II error. More formally, if the observations for control
and treatment groups are independently drawn and H0 : μ0 = μ1 and H1 : μ0 = μ1 ,
we need the difference in sample means Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 (which are of course not yet observed) to satisfy the following conditions:
7 The sample size calculations depend on the hypothesis test the experimenter will ex post employ to

analyse the data. For power calculations using non-parametric statistical tests see, for example, Rutström
and Wilcox (2009).
8 Useful software and documentation includes Liu et al. (2009) and Spybrook et al. (2009), Lenth (2001,

2006–2009), StataCorp (2007). Note that optimal sample sizes calculated by various software may not
match precisely those that can be derived from the formulas in this paper.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

447

1. A probability α of committing a Type I error in a two-sided test, i.e., a significance
level of α. This is true if

σ02 σ12
Ȳ1 − Ȳ0
= tα/2 ⇒ Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 = tα/2
+
(3)

n0
n1
σ02
σ12
n0 + n1
where σT2 and nT for T = {0, 1} are the conditional variance of the outcome and
the sample size of the control and treatment groups.
2. A probability β of committing a Type II error, i.e. a power of 1 − β, in a one-sided
test. This is true if

σ02 σ12
(Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 ) − δ
= −tβ ⇒ Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 = δ − tβ
+
(4)

n0
n1
σ02
σ12
n0 + n1
Using (3) to eliminate Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 from (4) we obtain

σ2 σ2
δ = (tα/2 + tβ ) 0 + 1
n0
n1

(5)

It can easily be shown that if σ02 = σ12 = σ 2 , i.e. var(τ ) = 0, then the smallest sample
sizes that solve this equality satisfy n0 = n1 = n and then
n∗0

= n∗1

 2
σ
= n = 2(tα/2 + tβ )
δ
∗

2

(6)

If the variance of the outcomes are not equal this becomes



 
σ12
tα/2 + tβ 2 σ02
+
δ
π0∗ π1∗
σ0
σ1
, π∗ =
π0∗ =
σ0 + σ1 1 σ0 + σ1

N∗ =

(7)

0
.
where N = n0 + n1 , πo + π1 = 1, π0 = non+n
1
If sample sizes are large enough so that the normal distribution is a good approximation for the t-distribution, then the above equations are a closed form solution for
the optimal sample sizes. If sample sizes are small, then n must be solved by using
successive approximations. Optimal sample sizes increase proportionally with the
variance of outcomes, non-linearly with the significance level and the power, and decrease proportionally with the square of the minimum detectable effect. The relative
distribution of subjects across treatment and control is proportional to the standard
deviation of the respective outcomes. This suggests that if the variance of outcomes
under treatment and control are fairly similar there should not be a large loss in efficiency from assigning equal sample sizes to each.

448

J.A. List et al.

Equation (6) makes it quite clear that any simple rule of thumb—such as place
30 subjects in each experimental treatment cell—has little basis in terms of power
unless the researcher believes that he wants to detect an approximately 0.70 standard
deviation change in the outcome variable. More generally, (6) can be used as a simple
heuristic to compute sample sizes necessary to detect various effects. For example,
following the standards in the literature and using a significance level of 0.05, and
setting power to 0.80, we have tα/2 = 1.96 and tβ = 0.84 from standard normal tables.
Thus, to detect a one (one-half) standard deviation change in the outcome variable one
would need n∗ = 16 (n∗ = 64) observations in each treatment cell.9
3.2 An empirical example
A quick perusal of experimental studies published in the social sciences, as well as
conducted in the business community, makes it clear that the status quo is to attempt
to include an equal number of subjects in every experimental cell. The summary
above provides a strong reason why we should be careful with this aspect of the design since we might fail to maximize power if we do not consider optimal sample
arrangements. Consider List (2001) as one illustrative example. List conducted a valuation field experiment at a sportscard show exploring how agents bid in Vickrey
second-price auctions for a baseball card. We focus here on the comparison of two
treatments among non-sportscard dealers: hypothetical versus actual bidding distributions. The underlying idea, therefore, is that in this case we might have heterogeneous
treatment effects in that agents respond differently to hypothetical auctions.
Indeed, previous work suggests that valuations in hypothetical settings have a
greater variance than valuations in tasks that are monetarily binding (see, e.g.,
Camerer and Hogarth 1999). Putting aside the issue of heterogeneous costs to obtain
sample points, the design fails to adequately adjust sample sizes for the greater expected variance in hypothetical bids. In the paper, the sample sizes for each group are
almost equivalent, while the standard deviation of bids in the hypothetical auction is
almost twice the standard deviation of bids in the actual auction.10 At a ratio of standard deviations of 2:1 the suboptimal design (with equal sample sizes in both groups)
requires an 11% larger total sample size than the optimal sample design (with the
ratio of sample sizes equal to the ratio of standard deviations) to achieve the same
power. Specifically, using (7), we calculate that given the total sample N = 175,
the optimal sample sizes for the hypothetical and actual auction are n1 = 111 and
n0 = 64, respectively. Using a uniform design instead of the optimal one decreases
the power of the experiment (at the observed effect size) from 69% to 66%. Had the
variances been even more different, the efficiency loss due to non-optimal sample
arrangements would have been much larger. All else equal, for a ratio of standard deviations of 3, 4, and 5 the required total sample size in the suboptimal (equal sample
size) design is 25%, 36%, and 44% larger than in the optimal design. Similarly, we
find that (using (5)) the minimum detectable effect size is 12%, 17%, and 20% higher
9 For further discussion of standardized effect sizes see for example Cohen (1988).
10 The mean bids (standard deviations) are $49.03 ($79.96) and $25.60 ($46.23) in the hypothetical and

actual auctions respectively. The book value of the baseball card was in the range of $200–$250.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

449

in the suboptimal design. However, with a level of power of 69%, the optimal design
is still underpowered relative to the conventional standard of 80%.
3.3 Treatments with unequal costs
Thus far we have implicitly assumed that sampling costs for treatment and control
groups are equal. Determining optimal sample sizes is somewhat more complicated
upon relaxation of this assumption. For example, in many cases treatment might be
more expensive to administer because it is costly to provide the good or service in
question. In this case, the key idea remains the same—we want to maximize the minimum detectable effect size, but now we must consider the cost of applying control
and treatment, c0 and c1 , respectively By maximizing the minimum detectable effect, as given by (5), subject to the budget constraint c0 n0 + c1 n1 = M, where M is
the total budget available, we find that

n∗1
c0 σ 1
=
n∗0
c1 σ 0
As before, the optimal sample sizes are proportional to the standard deviations of
the respective outcomes and, in addition, they are inversely proportional to the square
root of the relative sampling cost. Hence, if sampling costs for the control group are
smaller than for the treatment group, as is frequently the case, then the control group
should be larger than the treatment group. Yet, as with unequal variances, since the
optimal sample sizes are proportional to the square root of the cost of sampling this
only becomes important when the difference in costs grows large.
3.4 Parameter uncertainty
In estimating optimal sample sizes an experimenter needs to decide on a significance
level, power and estimable effect size. The choice of significance level is given by
convention at 5%, but deciding on the relevant power is more difficult. Experimenters
typically want to reject the null hypothesis that the treatment effect is zero, where
the probability of such a rejection is given by the power. For example, running an
experiment with a power of 80% means that 20% of the time the experimenter will
ex ante not be able to reject the null hypothesis of a zero treatment effect despite there
being a significant effect in the population.
In cases where the experimenter is interested in the non-rejection of the null hypothesis, equivalence testing is useful. Failure to reject a null hypothesis does not
provide unequivocal evidence that there is no treatment effect, since the failure to
reject may actually be the result of low statistical power. In equivalence testing, the
researcher decides on a value , where if the effect size is no larger than that value it
can be considered negligible. Thus, the null hypothesis becomes that a treatment has
a large effect, or H0 : |τ̄ | > , where τ̄ is the actual treatment effect. The alternative
hypothesis is H1 : |τ̄ | ≤ . The equivalence test entails two one-sided α level hypothesis tests. Schuirmann (1987) shows that if a 1 − 2α confidence interval lies entirely
between − and , then we can reject the null hypothesis in favor of equivalence at
the α level.

450

J.A. List et al.

Traditionally, economists specify all aspects of an experiment’s design in advance
of actually beginning the experiment (or at least they claim to do so). However, the
major difficulty in obtaining reasonable estimates of optimal sample sizes is that information on the variance of outcomes may be poor. The use of historical data and
previous similar experiments are likely to be important sources of information. Frequently, though, it is necessary to conduct a pilot experiment to obtain reasonable
estimates of the population parameters. This information is then used in deciding
how to design and apply treatments, as well as in deciding the number of subjects to
be sampled.
One issue with this approach is how to adapt the experimental design as new information is revealed. For example, as the experiment progresses the experimenter
may realize that initial estimates of the optimal sample size may have been too small
or too large. For a discussion of this issue in the clinical trial literature, including
adapting sample sizes and dosage levels during an ongoing clinical trial, see Berry
(2004). Bayesian approaches to this issue include Hahn et al. (2011), who develop
a “propensity score” method that uses estimates of heterogeneous treatment effects
from the first stage to set the conditional probability of treatment in the second stage,
following the optimal allocation of sample sizes under unequal variances. Further
examples in the economics literature include El-Gamal et al. (1993) and El-Gamal
and Palfrey (1996). These designs are more difficult to implement, but are especially
attractive if the cost of sampling is prohibitively high.

4 Optimal sample arrangement: further considerations
The formulas for the continuous case in a between subject design can be adapted for
other common experimental designs. Below we consider binary outcomes and cluster
designs.
4.1 Dichotomous treatment and binomial outcomes
To work out optimal sample sizes for binomial outcomes we assume that we can
use the normal approximation to the binomial distribution, and use (3) and (4) as in
the continuous case. However, in the cases of binary and count data the variance is
equal to p(1 − p) where p is the mean of the outcome variable. Thus, in (3), under
which the null hypothesis is true, the treatment and control groups will have equal
means and equal variances. In (4), under which the alternative hypothesis is true,
the treatment and control groups will have different means and therefore different
variances. Hence, the optimal sample sizes are

2
n∗0 = n∗1 = n∗ = tα/2 2p̄(1 − p̄) + tβ p0 (1 − p0 ) + p1 (1 − p1 ) δ −2

(8)

where p̄ = (p0 + p1 )/2.
Since the variance p(1 − p) will be maximized for p = 0.5, optimal sample sizes
will increase as p̄ approaches 0.5 (i.e., sample sizes decrease in |p̄ − 0.5|). Similarly,
if the null hypothesis is of the form p1 = kp0 , where k > 0, then the sample size
arrangement is dictated by k in the same manner as in the continuous case using (7).

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

451

The closer p1 is to 0.5 relative to p0 , the larger the proportion of the total sample size
that should be allocated to p1 (and vice versa).11
4.2 Cluster designs
Thus far we have assumed that the unobserved components are independently distributed among subjects. However, in particular with the recent growth in field experiments, the possibility of correlation in the unobserved component among subjects
within a cluster needs to be considered. Field experiments commonly feature cluster
randomization, in which clusters of individuals rather than independent individuals
are randomly allocated to intervention groups. A key property of cluster randomization trials is that the outcome of interest may occur at the individual level whereas the
randomization occurs at the cluster or group level. Thus, the unit of randomization is
different from the unit of statistical analysis. For example, an intervention aimed at
improving individual health might be randomly assigned to villages. In this case, the
lack of independence among individuals in the same village will affect both the optimal sample sizes and the analysis of the experimental results. As we illustrate in the
example below, the adjustment to sample sizes due to clustering can be substantial.
Consider the case where each subject is also a member of a group j and outcomes
for T = {0, 1} are given by
Yij T = α + τ̄ T + νj + εij
with εij the individual specific i.i.d. error term and νj a group specific i.i.d. error term
(we ignore Xi , αi and τi for simplicity). Suppose that randomization is at the level
of the cluster, where each cluster is of size m for both treatment and control groups.
Under the assumption of equal variances across treatment and control groups (and
thus equal sample sizes), optimal sample sizes in cluster designs can be calculated
via the following equation:
n∗0

= n∗1

 2
σ 
1 + (m − 1)ρ
= n = 2(tα/2 + tβ )
δ
∗

2

(9)

n
with 2(k − 1) degrees of freedom (assuming no other covariates), where k = m
is the
number of clusters per treatment group, σ 2 = var(νj ) + var(εij ), is the variance of
var(νj )
is the coeffithe outcome for treatment and control groups, and ρ = var((νj )+var(ε
ij )
cient of intracluster correlation. This is simply our previous expression, as given by
(6), augmented by the “variance inflation factor”, 1 + (m − 1)ρ. Equation (9) shows
that the necessary total sample size in a cluster design increases (near) proportionally with both the size of each cluster and the intracluster correlation. Also notice
that the degrees of freedom in a cluster design are far smaller, further increasing the
necessary sample size. Hence, in the presence of intracluster correlation, ρ = 0, it is
important to randomize over many, small clusters so as to maximize the efficiency of
the experiment.

11 For further discussion of binary data, see for example Fleiss et al. (2003).

452

J.A. List et al.

The decision on the optimal number of clusters k and number of subjects in each
cluster m in a cluster design will depend on the cost of sampling within a cluster
and the fixed cost of starting to sample from a new cluster. Denoting cm as the cost
of each subject and ck as a fixed cost per cluster, then the total cost of collecting
the data is 2 (cm m + ck ) k = M, where M is the budget. Note that we are assuming
equal sampling costs for treatment and control groups. Maximizing the minimum detectable effect size, found by rearranging (9), subject to this budget constraint yields
an expression for the optimal size of each cluster


(1 − ρ) ck
∗
m =
(10)
ρ
cm
var((εij )
where (1−ρ)
= var((ν
. The optimal cluster size is proportional to the square root of
ρ
j)
the ratio of the fixed cost per cluster and the cost per subject, and to the ratio of the
standard deviation of the within and between cluster variation. Perhaps surprisingly,
the optimal cluster size is independent of the total budget available for the experiment. Thus on a limited budget the experimenter should first work out how many
subjects to sample from each cluster, and then sample as many cluster as is affordable. The optimal number of clusters k ∗ is found by substituting the expression for
the optimal cluster size m∗ from (10) back into (9), recalling that n = mk.12 The
software available at Liu et al. (2009) and documented in Spybrook et al. (2009) is a
comprehensive tool for designing cluster level experiments.

5 Optimal sample arrangement: varying treatment levels
5.1 Varying treatment levels and continuous outcomes
This section explores optimal design when the treatment variable is permitted to
take on varying levels, under the assumption of homogeneous treatment effects. The
reader who is interested in cases of varying treatment levels and variance heterogeneity should see Kish (1965) and Wilcox (1996). To begin, let us return to the empirical
specification above, (1), but now consider the simpler case where τi = 0 for all i ;
thus treatment and control outcomes have the same variance. Now outcome Yi is a
function of observable variables Xi , a linear function of the treatment variable T and
εi , which is assumed i.i.d.
Yi = Xi β + τ̄ T + εi
The goal in this case is to derive the most precise estimate of τ̄ by using exogenous
variation in T . To add further structure to the problem, we assume that the outcome
variable is measurable in continuous units (binary data outcomes do not change the
nature of the arguments) and the experimenter can set the treatment variable over the
range [0, Tmax ].
12 See, for example, Raudenbush (1997), Donner and Klar (2000), Bloom (2005), Raudenbush et al. (2007)

and Spybrook et al. (2009) for further discussion of optimal cluster design.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

453

Each time we present this type of exercise to our students, querying them about the
optimal sample arrangement, the modal response is one of uniformity: either “split
the sample into integers and equally distribute the sample,” or “split the sample into
equivalently sized cells” naturally become the crowd favorites. Before considering
the correct response, similar to the case with dichotomous treatment, it is useful to
reflect on the mechanics of the regression model in the relationship given above. To
maximize precision, one must first consider techniques to minimize the variance of
var((ε)
the estimated treatment effect. Recall that var(τ̂ ) = n·var(T
) . This simple relationship
provides three ways to increase precision: (1) decrease the variance of the unobserved component var(ε), (2) increase the sample size n, or (3) increase the variance
of treatment var(T ). We are struck by the fact that in most literatures, including our
own, discussions surrounding changes in sample size, perhaps the costliest approach,
dominate the landscape when considering techniques to increase precision. Yet, there
is an exact trade-off inherent in experimental design that is clear from the regression model. For example, tripling the variation in treatment has an identical effect on
precision as tripling the sample size.
If the experimenter has strong priors that the effect of treatment is linear, then it is
straightforward to see that the variance of treatment is maximized by placing half of
the sample in treatment cell T = 0 and half of the sample in treatment cell T = Tmax .
Clearly, this maximizes the variance of treatment and hence minimizes the standard
error of the estimate of the treatment effect (for derivations of this and the following
results we direct the reader to Atkinson and Donev 1992, and Mead 1988). Hence, if
a linear treatment effect is to be identified, the optimal sample design is to place half
of the sample at each of the extremes of the range of potential treatment intensities.
The overall sample size can then be calculated using (6) where σ 2 /n is given by (2).
If the analyst believes that the intensity of treatment has a non-linear effect on
the outcome variable, then clearly sampling from two values of T is inappropriate
since non-linear effects cannot be identified. In general, identification requires that
the number of treatment cells used should be equal to the highest polynomial order plus one. For example, if a quadratic relationship is presumed, then three treatment cells should be chosen in the feasible range. Further, in this case those treatment cells selected should be at the extremes and at the midpoint of the range,
T = {0, Tmax /2, Tmax }, where the optimal proportions in each of these treatments
cells is { 14 , 12 , 14 }. As McClelland (1997) notes, intuitively the test for a quadratic effect compares the mean of the outcomes at the extremes to the mean of the outcome
at the midpoint; and as before, the variance is maximized when equal proportions
are allocated to calculating these two means. If both a linear and a quadratic effect
are included, then the problem becomes considerably more complicated, with the solution being a weighted average of the linear and quadratic optimal allocations (see
Atkinson and Donev 1992).
A related problem is one where the treatment levels are ordinal (categorical)
rather than continuous. In this situation it is key to decide which contrasts are of
primary interest. For example, take a situation where there are three treatment scenarios {A, B, C}. Imagine the researcher is primarily interested in comparing outcomes
under a baseline scenario A with outcomes under two alternative scenarios {B, C},
but the outcomes under scenarios B and C will not be compared with each other.

454

J.A. List et al.

In that case the optimal allocation weights more heavily toward A, { 12 , 14 , 14 }, since,
intuitively, scenario A is used in two contrasts. If instead the mean difference in outcomes under B and C is of primary interest then the optimal allocation is {0, 12 , 12 }.
The interested reader should see McClelland (1997) for a more detailed discussion.
5.2 An empirical example
In this section we discuss an empirical example that illustrates our points. Our chosen
example is in the area of the economics of charity. Recently a set of lab and field
experiments have lent insights into the “demand side” of charitable fundraising. In
this spirit, Karlan and List (2007) designed a natural field experiment to measure key
parameters of the theory. In their study, they solicited contributions from more than
50,000 supporters of a liberal organization. They randomized households into several
different groups to explore whether upfront money used as matching funds promotes
giving. Among other things they tested whether larger match ratios induced more
giving. In particular, they use three treatment cells corresponding to match ratios of
3:1 (i.e., a $3 match for every $1 donated), 2:1 and 1:1.
Above we argued that if one were merely interested in estimating a linear price
effect over this range, and suppressed cost considerations, then the 1:1 and 3:1 cells
should have been the only ones sampled. Given a fixed number of subjects, we use
(5) to calculate that the minimum detectable effect of the two treatment cells design
(with an equal distribution of subjects across treatment cells) is about 22% higher
than that of the three treatment cell design.13 Alternatively, the three treatment cell
design requires 50% more observations than the two treatment cell design (for a given
power, significance level and minimum detectable effect). Suppose, instead of a linear
effect, the authors were interested in estimating a quadratic effect and had allocated
the sample accordingly (i.e., half the sample in the 2:1 cell and one-quarter of the
sample each in the 1:1 and 3:1 cells). If in fact the treatment effect turned out to be
linear rather than quadratic, this design would result in a minimum detectable effect
that is about 41% higher than that of the optimal two treatment cell design for linear
effects.

6 Concluding remarks
In experimental economics discussion of optimal sample arrangement is rare. In this
way, finding a study that makes use of the rules of thumb discussed herein is akin to
a ballroom dancer searching for a partner in a hip-hop dance club. Of course, there
are good reasons that we are hip-hoppers. First, the effect size and variance are both
unknown and difficult to guess without robust data, which could be costly to collect.
Second, the analyst might be involved in multiple hypothesis testing, and employing
a multiple treatment design makes it more likely that a statistically significant result
will emerge. Third, the status quo is powerful: one can readily guess the nature of the
13 We use the estimated standard error of 0.049 from the empirical example, Karlan and List (2007), Ta-

ble 2A, Panel A, col (4). We assume a significance level of 5% and a power level of 80%.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

455

referee reports for a paper in which the author chooses to sample only the endpoints
of the feasible treatment region. Even in those cases where the referee agrees that
linearity is appropriate, we suspect that the referee will be more comfortable with
some mid-range sampling. We hope that this study begins to break that mold, and
induces experimenters to design more efficient experiments.
In this respect, under a certain set of assumptions, this study pinpoints several rules
of thumb that experimenters might find useful:
1. With a continuous outcome measure one should only allocate subjects equally
across treatment and control if the sample variances of the outcome means are
expected to be equal in the treatment and control groups, i.e. if the treatment effect
is homogeneous.
2. In those cases where the sample variances are not equal, the ratio of the sample
sizes should be set equal to the ratio of the standard deviations.
3. If the cost of sampling subjects varies across experimental cells, then the ratio of
the sample sizes is inversely proportional to the square root of the relative costs.
4. When the unit of randomization is different from the unit of analysis the optimal size of each cluster increases with the ratio of the within to between cluster
standard deviation, and decreases with the square root of the ratio of the cost of
sampling a subject to the fixed cost of sampling from a new cluster.
5. When the treatment variable itself is continuous, the optimal design requires that
under the prior of a linear treatment effect the sample should be equally divided on
the endpoints of the feasible treatment range, with no intermediate points sampled.
Clearly, this study represents only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to discussing optimal experimental design. We hope that methodological discussion eventually sheds its perceived inferiority in experimental economics and begins to, at least,
ride shotgun in our drive to a deeper understanding of economic science. Several
prominent discussions remain to be heard: generalizability of results across domains
(but, see Levitt and List 2007, and subsequent studies), use of the strategy method,
one-shot versus repeated observations, elicitation of beliefs, within versus between
subject experimental designs, using experiments to estimate heterogeneous treatment
effects; and in the design area more specifically, optimal design using confidence
intervals, using multiple priors and Bayesian and frequentist sample size determination are but just a few areas not yet properly vetted in the experimental economics
community.
Acknowledgements We thank the Editor, two anonymous referees, Glenn Harrison, Emily Oster,
Stephen Raudenbush, Azeem Shaikh, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago for useful
comments. Clifford Clive provided research assistance.

References
Atkinson, A. C., & Donev, A. N. (1992). Optimum experimental designs. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Berry, D. A. (2004). Bayesian statistics and the efficiency and ethics of clinical trials. Statistical Science,
19, 175–187.
Bloom, H. S. (2005). Randomizing Groups to Evaluate Place-Based Programs. In H. S. Bloom (Ed.),
Learning more from social experiments: evolving analytic approaches. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.

456

J.A. List et al.

Blundell, R., & Costa Dias, M. (2002). Alternative approaches to evaluation in empirical microeconomics.
Portuguese Economic Journal, 1, 91–115.
Camerer, C. F., & Hogarth, R. M. (1999). The effects of financial incentives in experiments: a review and
capital-labor-production framework. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 7–42.
Cochran, W. G., & Cox, G. M. (1950). Experimental designs. New York: Wiley.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale: Erlbaum Associates.
Donner, A., & Klar, N. (2000). Design and analysis of cluster randomization in health research. London:
Holder Arnold.
Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Kremer, M. (2007). Using randomization in development economics research: a toolkit (CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6059). Center for Economic Policy Research, London,
England.
El-Gamal, M. A., & Palfrey, T. R. (1996). Economical experiments: Bayesian efficient experimental designs. International Journal of Game Theory, 25, 495–517.
El-Gamal, M. A., McKelvey, R. D., & Palfrey, T. R. (1993). A Bayesian sequential experimental study of
learning in games. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88, 428–435.
Fisher, R. A. (1935). The design of experiments. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Fleiss, J. L., Levin, B., & Paik, M. C. (2003). Statistical methods for rates and proportions. Hoboken:
Wiley-Interscience.
Greenwald, A. G. (1976). Within-subjects design: to use or not to use. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 314–
320.
Hahn, J., Hirano, K., & Karlan, D. (2011). Adaptive experimental design using the propensity score. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29(1), 96–108.
Harrison, G., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, XLII, 1009–1055.
Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I., & Rutström, E. E. (2009). Risk attitudes, randomization to treatment, and
self-selection into experiments. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 70, 498–507.
Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81,
945–960.
Kanninen, B. J. (2002). Optimal design for multinomial choice experiments. Journal of Marketing Research, 39(2), 14–227.
Karlan, D., & List, J. A. (2007). Does price matter in charitable giving? Evidence from a large-scale natural
field experiment. The American Economic Review, 97, 1774–1793.
Keren, G. (1993). Between or within-subjects design: a methodological dilemma. In G. Keren & C. Lewis
(Eds.), A handbook for data analysis in the behavioral sciences: methodological issues. Hillsdale:
Erlbaum Associates.
Kish, L. (1965). Survey sampling. New York: Wiley.
Kramer, M. S., & Shapiro, S. H. (1984). Scientific challenges in the application of randomized trials.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 252(19), 2739–2745.
Lenth, R. V. (2001). Some practical guidelines for effective sample size determination. The American
Statistician, 55, 187–193.
Lenth, R. V. (2006–2009). Java applets for power and sample size [Computer Software]. http://www.stat.
uiowa.edu/rlenth/Power. Accessed February 2010.
Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2009). Field experiments in economics: the past, the present, and the future.
European Economic Review, 53(1), 1–18.
Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2007). What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences tell us
about the real world? The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 153–174.
List, J. A. (2001). Do explicit warnings eliminate the hypothetical bias in elicitation procedures? Evidence
from field auctions for sportscards. The American Economic Review, 91(5), 1498–1507.
List, J. A. (2006). Field experiments: a bridge between lab and naturally occurring data. Advances in
Economic Analysis & Policy, 6(2), 8.
Liu, X., Spybrook, J., Congden, R., Martinez, A., & Raudenbush, S. W. (2009). Optimal design
for longitudinal and multilevel research v.2.0 [Computer Software]. Available at: http://www.
wtgrantfoundation.org/resources/overview/research_tools.
Loomes, G. (2005). Modeling the stochastic component of behaviour in experiments: some issues for the
interpretation of data. Experimental Economics, 8, 301–323.
Mead, R. (1988). The design of experiments: statistical principles for practical application. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McClelland, G. H. (1997). Optimal design in psychological research. Psychological Methods, 2(1), 3–19.
Raudenbush, S. W. (1997). Statistical analysis and optimal design for cluster randomized trials. Psychological Methods, 2(2), 173–185.

Some simple rules of thumb for experimental design

457

Raudenbush, S. W., Martinez, A., & Spybrook, J. (2007). Strategies for improving precision in grouprandomized experiments. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 29(1), 5–29.
Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational studies
of causal effects. Biometrika, 70, 41–55.
Rubin, D.B. (1978). Bayesian inference for causal effects: the role of randomization. Annals of Statistics,
6, 34–58.
Rutström, E. E., & Wilcox, N. T. (2009). Stated beliefs versus inferred beliefs: a methodological inquiry
and experimental test. Games and Economic Behavior, 67, 616–632.
Schuirmann, D. J. (1987). A comparison of the two one-sided tests procedure and the power approach for
assessing the equivalence of bioavailability. Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Biopharmaceutics, 15,
657–680.
Spybrook, J., Raudenbush, S. W., Congden, R., & Martinez, A. (2009). Optimal design for longitudinal
and multilevel research: documentation for the optimal design software (Working Paper). Available
at: http://www.wtgrantfoundation.org/resources/overview/research_tools.
StataCorp (2007). Stata statistical software: Release 10. College Station: StataCorp LP.
Wilcox, R. R. (1996). Statistics for the social sciences. San Diego: Academic Press.
Wilcox, N. (2008). Stochastic models for binary discrete choice under risk: a critical primer and econometric comparison. In J. C. Cox & G. W. Harrison (Eds.), Research in experimental economics: Vol. 12.
Risk aversion in experiments. Bingley: Emerald.

