Homo experimentalis Evolves
John A. List
Science 321, 207 (2008);
DOI: 10.1126/science.1156716

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your
colleagues, clients, or customers by clicking here.
Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by
following the guidelines here.
The following resources related to this article are available online at
www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of December 5, 2012 ):
Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online
version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/321/5886/207.full.html
A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be
found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/321/5886/207.full.html#related
This article has been cited by 3 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science
This article has been cited by 6 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/321/5886/207.full.html#related-urls
This article appears in the following subject collections:
Economics
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/economics

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright
2008 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a
registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

PERSPECTIVES
Solanaceae (such as pepper, eggplant, and
petunia) (19) should enable insightful comparative studies.
The humble spud has come a long way
from its origins in the high Andes. As research
uniting genomics, breeding, and biodiversity
accelerates, the potato looks set to play an
even more important role not only in aiding
our understanding of genetics, but in feeding a
still-growing human population. It is fitting
that we celebrate a plant that has given our
species so much, and still has so much to offer.
References and Notes
1. D. G. Frodin, Taxon 53, 753 (2004).
2. T. Weese, L. Bohs, Syst. Bot. 33, 445 (2007).
3. I. E. Peralta, D. M. Spooner, S. Knapp, Syst. Bot. Monogr.
84, 1 (2008).
4. D. M. Spooner, A. Salas, in Handbook of Potato
Production, Improvement, and Post-Harvest
Management, J. Gopal, S. M. Paul Khurana, Eds.
(Haworth’s, Binghampton, NY, 2006), pp. 1–39.

5. D. M. Spooner, F. Rodríguez, Z. Polgár, H. E. Ballard Jr.,
S. H. Jansky, The Plant Genome, a supplement to Crop
Sci. 48 (S1) (suppl.), S27 (2008).
6. M. M. J. Jacobs et al., BMC Evol. Biol. 8, 145 (2008).
7. D. M. Spooner et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
19398 (2007).
8. J. G. Hawkes, The Potato: Evolution, Biodiversity and
Genetic Resources (Belhaven, Oxford, 1990).
9. D. M. Spooner et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
14694 (2005).
10. J. `Sliwka et al., Plant Breeding 127, 49 (2008).
11. J. G. Hawkes, J. Francisco-Ortega, Econ. Bot. 46, 86
(1992).
12. M. Ames, D. M. Spooner. Am. J. Bot. 95, 252
(2008).
13. J. D. G. Jones, J. L. Dangl, Nature 444, 323 (2006).
14. See news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/6197768.stm.
15. G. Diretto et al., BMC Plant Biol. 7, 11 (2007).
16. G. Diretto et al., PLoS One 4, e350 (2008).
17. See www.potatogenome.net.
18. See www.sgn.cornell.edu.
19. L. A. Mueller et al., Comp. Funct. Genomics 6, 153
(2005).

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

carotenoid pigments that are the precursors of
this essential nutrient. Genetically engineered
potatoes have been produced that have fourfold
increases in vitamin A precursor levels—a true
“golden potato” (15, 16). All three important
carotenoid genes are necessary for attaining
maximal levels of tuber carotenoids in potato,
unlike in the more famous golden rice or
canola, where a single gene is more important
than the rest.
The complexity of potato genetics and
variation is the subject of intense study by
genome scientists. An international consortium has begun to sequence the potato
genome (17) using a diploid line. Coupled
with the emerging tomato genome sequence
(18), the potato genome will provide new data
for not only plant breeding, but also for evolutionary studies. The fact that gene order is
similar across several crop species in the

10.1126/science.1159278

ECONOMICS

Economists are increasingly using field
experiments to explore economic behaviors.

Homo experimentalis Evolves
John A. List

he fundamental challenge in the social
sciences is how to go beyond correlational analysis to provide insights on causation. Economists have
long used precise models and econometric techniques to answer causal
questions using variations in naturally
occurring data (1). Increasingly, insights on causation are also gained
through the use of controlled experimentation. In this approach, causation is usually identified through randomization, much
like controlled experiments used in drug trials.
In economics, laboratory experiments
have been used to meaningfully test theories,
lend important qualitative insights, and provide a first glimpse at what can happen in an
economic system. To complement lab and
naturally occurring economic data, studies
that gather data via field experiments have
become more frequent during the past decade.
Such experiments are a useful marriage
between laboratory and naturally occurring
data in that they represent a mixture of control
and realism usually not achieved in the lab or
with naturally occurring data.
Economists use three main types of field
experiments to sample various populations and

CREDIT: PETER HOEY

T

University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic
Research, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. E-mail: jlist@
uchicago.edu

situations (2). Artifactual field experiments
share many of the qualities of conventional lab
experiments but use a subject pool from the
population of interest. Framed field experiments account for important situational features of the market of interest by embedding
decisions in their natural context, and therefore
making decisions much less abstract. Yet the
subjects remain aware that they are part of an
experimental study. Framed field experiments
are a cousin of social experiments of the 20th
century such as employment programs and
housing allowances (3). Finally, in a natural
field experiment, the analyst manipulates
experimental conditions in a natural manner,
whereby the experimental subjects are unaware
that they are participating in an experiment.
This approach combines the most attractive
elements of the laboratory and of naturally

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 321

Published by AAAS

occurring data: randomization and realism.
Each of these field experiment types is
a means of collecting data. In the sciences, data are generally collected for
three purposes: to provide enough
facts to help construct a theory, to test
the predictions of a theory, and to
measure key parameters. Field experiments in economics can also be a useful tool for each of these data purposes.
For example, Anderson and co-authors
(4) have used a natural field experiment to
collect facts useful for constructing a theory
about consumer reactions to advertisements.
Working with a retail catalog merchant, the
authors manipulated the frequency of catalog
advertising sent to randomly selected customer
samples. Over an 8-month period, one set
of consumers received 17 catalogs, whereas
another set received 12 catalogs. The increased
frequency positively influenced sales among
the consumers who purchase infrequently, but
the effect on the company’s highly valued consumers was negative in the long run. The
results pinpoint important roles for both brandswitching and how advertisements affect consumers balancing current consumption against
future consumption.
In another recent natural field experiment,
Reiley and Katkar (5) used Internet-based
auctions to test the theory of reserve prices in
auctions. The authors designed a field experi-

11 JULY 2008

207

PERSPECTIVES
matching rates on charitable giving by soliciting contributions from more than 50,000 supporters. In one group, solicitees were informed that for every dollar contributed, an
outside donor would match the contribution
1:1. A control group received no match, and
other groups received more generous matching rates (such as 2:1 or 3:1). Simply announcing that a match is available increases the revenue per solicitation by 19%. In addition, the
match offer increases the probability that an
individual donates by 22%. These estimates
shed light on a key parameter for fundraisers:
how sensitive contributions are to the “price”
of giving.
In the examples above, I have focused on
natural field experiments; similar examples
can be found for artifactual and framed field
experiments. The various field experimental
approaches, lab experiments, and econometric methods using naturally occurring data
should be thought of as strong complements—much like theory and empiricism.

Combining insights gained from each methodology will permit scholars to develop a
deeper scientific understanding. For example,
economists have shown that there is much to
be gained from gathering data from a variety
of settings, both controlled and uncontrolled.
In those cases where behaviors are robust, the
advice to policy-makers can be unequivocal.
In other instances, behaviors might differ systematically, and developing theory to explain
such discrepancies deepens our economic
understanding. Similar gains can accrue
within the sciences more broadly.
References
1. J. J. Heckman, Int. Stat. Rev. 76, 1 (2008).
2. G. W. Harrison, J. A. List, J. Econ. Lit. 42, 1009 (2004).
3. J. A. Hausman, D. A. Wise, Social Experimentation (Univ.
of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985).
4. E. T. Anderson, Y. Hu, E. Brynjolfsson, D. Simester, Econ.
Inq. 46, 3 (2008).
5. D. Reiley, R. Katkar, Adv. Econ. An. Pol. 6, 7 (2006).
6. D. Karlan, J. A. List, Am. Econ. Rev. 95, 1688 (2007).
10.1126/science.1156716

GENETICS

Insights into the Pathogenesis
of Autism

Genetic analysis of inbred families reveals
genes associated with susceptibility to autism.

James S. Sutcliffe

utism is a common developmental
disorder that profoundly impairs the
emergence of social behaviors and
communication in children before 3 years
of age. Repetitive, stereotyped, and obsessivecompulsive–like behaviors are also prominent features of the disorder (1), and are
often accompanied by cognitive impairment,
seizures or epilepsy, gastrointestinal complaints, disordered sleep, and other problems.
Identifying risk factors for autism has become
a high priority of scientists, lay groups, and
parents of autistic children. On page 218 of
this issue, Morrow et al. (2) add several more
genes to a growing number of genetic abnormalities that correlate with susceptibility to
autism (see the figure).
Twin and family studies demonstrate that
the etiology of autism has a substantial
genetic component. Current estimates of sibling recurrence risk—the likelihood that a
younger sibling of an autistic child will also
have autism—is greater than 15% (3–5).

A

Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232–8548, USA.
E-mail: james.s.sutcliffe@vanderbilt.edu

208

Comparing this to population rates of approximately 1 per 500 children for narrowly
defined autism or 1 per 150 children for the
more broadly defined autism spectrum
disorders indicates a high degree of heritability in families.
Determining specific genetic changes that
increase the risk of developing disorders like
autism is extraordinarily complex (6) due to
heterogeneity—different kinds of variation at
many underlying genes are involved. One type
of variation consists of rare disease-causing or
highly penetrant mutations, and these have
implicated specific biological processes.
Similarly, common variation—usually discrete changes in DNA sequence—has been
identified in autism, but only a few specific
findings have been replicated. Other important clues to genetic factors in autism include
abnormalities such as chromosomal translocations, inversions, and large deletions or
duplications, which are more frequent in individuals that present clinically with dysmorphic features and severe cognitive impairment. Geneticists have long hypothesized that
genes disrupted by chromosomal abnormalities in isolated cases may play a role in suscep-

11 JULY 2008

VOL 321

SCIENCE

Published by AAAS

tibility to autism more broadly and have pursued experiments toward this end.
Recent advances in DNA microarray technologies have revealed a substantial etiological role for small losses and gains of DNA—
so-called copy number variation—in autism
(7–12). All individuals harbor this common
form of genetic variation, which can be inherited from a parent or can arise as a sporadic
event de novo. However, a large and growing
number of deletions and duplications of DNA
have been found in people with autism. As
comparisons to control samples identify
which variants are unique, more frequent, or
equal in autism versus control cases, we will
be better able to interpret the observed copy
number variation.
Much discussion has focused on whether a
copy number variant is inherited or arises de
novo, with greater interpretive weight vis-àvis disease association given to the latter. As
with large chromosomal abnormalities, it may
be that the disruption or dysregulation of gene
expression underlies the risk or causal effect
for a given copy number variant. Genes may
be lost or an extra copy may be present on a
given chromosome; genes flanking a DNA

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

ment to compare outcomes in auctions with
secret versus public reserve prices, two common approaches used to auction goods on the
Internet. They auctioned 50 matched pairs of
Pokemon trading cards on eBay: one with a
minimum bid of 30% of the card’s book value,
and one with a minimum bid of $0.05 and a
secret reserve price equal to 30% of the card’s
book value. Keeping the reserve price secret
reduced the probability of selling any card, the
number of serious bidders in an auction, and
the amount of the winning bid. Thus, contrary
to the beliefs of many eBay sellers and to the
predictions of models of rational bidder
behavior, using secret reserve prices instead of
public reserve prices actually lowers a seller’s
expected returns.
An example of a natural field experiment
designed to measure key parameters of a theory is (6), where parameters associated with
why people give to charities are estimated. In
this study, Karlan and I worked with a private
charity to explore the effects of different

