American Political Science Review

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

doi:10.1017/S0003055413000403

Vol. 107, No. 4

November 2013

c American Political Science Association 2013


Explaining Support for Combatants during Wartime:
A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan
JASON LYALL Yale University
GRAEME BLAIR Princeton University
KOSUKE IMAI Princeton University

H

ow are civilian attitudes toward combatants affected by wartime victimization? Are these effects
conditional on which combatant inflicted the harm? We investigate the determinants of wartime
civilian attitudes towards combatants using a survey experiment across 204 villages in five
Pashtun-dominated provinces of Afghanistan—the heart of the Taliban insurgency. We use endorsement
experiments to indirectly elicit truthful answers to sensitive questions about support for different combatants. We demonstrate that civilian attitudes are asymmetric in nature. Harm inflicted by the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is met with reduced support for ISAF and increased support for
the Taliban, but Taliban-inflicted harm does not translate into greater ISAF support. We combine a
multistage sampling design with hierarchical modeling to estimate ISAF and Taliban support at the
individual, village, and district levels, permitting a more fine-grained analysis of wartime attitudes than
previously possible.

ow does the victimization of civilians affect
their support for combatants during wartime?
Are the effects of violence on attitudes uniform
across warring parties, or are they conditional on who
inflicted the harm? Civilians, existing accounts tacitly
assume, are simply guided by a logic of survival that

H

Jason Lyall is Associate Professor of Political Science, Department
of Political Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 (jason.lyall@yale.edu), http://www.jasonlyall.com.
Graeme Blair is a Ph.D. candidate, Department of Politics,
Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544 (gblair@princeton.edu),
http://graemeblair.com.
Kosuke Imai is Professor, Department of Politics, Princeton
University, Princeton NJ 08544 (kimai@princeton.edu), http://imai.
princeton.edu.
An unabbreviated version of this article won the Pi Sigma Alpha
award for the best paper presented at the 2012 Midwest Political
Science Association annual meeting and is available at the authors’
websites. We thank the Opinion Research Center of Afghanistan
(ORCA), and especially Rafiq Kakar, Abdul Nabi Barekzai, Mr.
Soor Gul, Zabihullah Usmani, and Mr. Asadi, along with district
managers and the 149 enumerators who conducted the survey, for
helpful feedback and excellent work under trying conditions. Our
program manager, Prakhar Sharma, deserves special thanks. We also
thank Will Bullock, Sarah Chayes, Jeff Checkel, Christina Davis,
Dan Gingerich, Don Green, Betsy Levy Paluck, and Abbey Steele,
along with two APSR editors and three anonymous reviewers, for
helpful comments on an earlier version. The survey instruments,
pretest data, or earlier versions of the article benefited from feedback
from seminar participants at George Washington University, Duke
University, the University of Pennsylvania, the Ohio State University, University of California San Diego, the Juan March Institute,
the University of British Columbia, Cornell University, Harvard
University, Princeton University, and the University of Washington.
Financial support for the survey from Yale’s Institute for Social and
Policy Studies’s Field Experiment Initiative and the Macmillan Center for International and Area Studies is gratefully acknowledged.
Additional support from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(Lyall; Grant No. FA9550-09-1-0314) and the National Science Foundation (Imai; Grant No. SES–0849715) is also acknowledged. This
research was approved by Yale’s Human Subjects Committee under
IRB protocol no. 1006006952. In the Appendix we present further
details about the survey and analyses, and replication materials are
available at http://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/20368.

denies them the luxury of taking into consideration
prior ethnic or ideological attachments. This seemingly
eliminates the need to study wartime attitudes.
We challenge this view by arguing that the effects of
violence on civilian attitudes are conditional on combatant identity (Lyall 2010). We contend that intergroup bias—the systematic tendency to interpret the
actions of one’s own in-group in a more favorable light
than those of the out-group—should produce robust
and observable asymmetries in how combatant actions
affect civilian attitudes. Simply put, it is likely that harm
by one’s own group carries a different set of implications and effects than victimization by members of an
out-group. We anticipate that in-group harm does not
lead to either increased support for the out-group or
to significant loss of support for in-group combatants.
Harm by the out-group, however, is likely to increase
out-group antipathy while heightening support for ingroup combatants.
To test this argument, we conducted a survey in the
very heart of the current Taliban insurgency (Barfield
2010; Crews and Tarzi 2008; Giustozzi 2008; Jones
2009) that utilizes multiple endorsement experiments
to measure civilian attitudes toward the Taliban and
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Afghanistan. We combine a multistage sampling design
with multilevel statistical modeling (Bullock, Imai, and
Shapiro 2011) to examine attitudes among 2,754 male
respondents in 204 villages within 21 districts of five
Pashtun-dominated provinces.
Three main findings emerge. First, there is clear
evidence that victimization by ISAF and the Taliban
has asymmetrical effects on individual attitudes. Harm
inflicted by ISAF is met with reduced support for
ISAF and increased support for the Taliban. In contrast, Taliban-inflicted harm does not translate into
greater support for ISAF and has only a marginally
negative effect on Taliban support. Second, subsequent
efforts by each combatant to mitigate the effects of
the harm they caused among aggrieved individuals

679

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

actually appear to be successful, though in ISAF’s case
this finding rests on a small subset of selected individuals given ISAF’s haphazard approach to responding
to civilian casualties.1 Third, we find little support for
alternative explanations that privilege prior patterns of
violence, the current distribution of territorial control
by the combatants, or the role of economic assistance
in determining civilian attitudes. Taken together, these
findings illustrate the need to broaden our theories
to consider the psychological mechanisms that drive
civilian behavior in wartime.

THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
Motivation: Rational Peasants, Civilian
Agency, and Wartime Attitudes
A near consensus now exists among practitioners
around the notion that counterinsurgency wars are decided by the relative success each combatant enjoys in
winning popular support from the civilian population
(Kilcullen 2009; Mao 1961; Thompson 1966; Trinquier
2006; U.S. Army 2007). From the counterinsurgent’s
perspective, victory is obtained through a combination of service provision, material assistance, information campaigns, and, above all, restraint on the use
of one’s force with the goal of minimizing civilian
casualties. From the Vietnam-era Hamlet Evaluation
System (HES) to contemporary efforts in Iraq and
Afghanistan, winning the “hearts and minds” of the
civilian population, or at least an important subset of
it, is a central element of counterinsurgency campaigns.
Surprisingly, however, there are few rigorous empirical studies of civilian attitudes toward combatants during wartime (see Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2011,
for an exception). To be sure, this gap is due in part to
the logistical and ethical issues that accompany survey
research in a wartime setting. Even if surveys could be
conducted safely, methodological issues abound: social
desirability bias, high refusal rates, and preference falsification may frustrate efforts to obtain reliable answers,
especially if sensitive issues such as support for combatants are investigated using direct questions (e.g.,
Berinsky 2004; DeMaio 1984). As a result, one leading
scholar has argued we should “bracket [the] question of
individual motives and attitudes” (Kalyvas 2006, 101)
in favor of theories that emphasize the more easily
observable structure of opportunities and constraints
facing civilians in wartime (see also Leites and Wolf
1970, 45).
Indeed, the prevailing view of civilians in the civil war
literature suggests they are “rational peasants” (Popkin
1979), that is, utility-maximizing agents driven by the
short-term dictates of survival. Without strong ethnic
or ideological attachments, civilians seek to minimize
their exposure to harm from the combatants while
maximizing the benefits offered by combatants, including material assistance and basic security. Based on
1 In fact, only 164 of our respondents were approached by ISAF
after victimization, while the Taliban approached 535 respondents.
See Figure 10 in the Appendix for the full distribution of responses.

680

November 2013

this consensus, our theories concentrated on explaining
which factors drive civilian behavior: the relative balance of control exercised by combatants (Kalyvas 2006;
Kalyvas and Kocher 2007; Leites and Wolf 1970), competitive service provision (Akerlof and Yellen 1994;
Berman, Shapiro, and Felter 2011; Crost and Johnston
2010), and relative levels of civilian victimization (Condra and Shapiro 2012; Kocher, Pepinsky, and Kalyvas
2011; Stoll 1993), to name only three. Prior allegiances,
if present at all, are thought to be easily recast in the
face of a given mixture of (threatened) punishments
and (promised) rewards levied by combatants who aim
to exercise control over the civilian population.
Despite privileging different independent variables,
these theories converge on the same empirical prediction: civilians should respond symmetrically to combatant actions. Put differently, civilians should be indifferent to which combatant provides material assistance
(Berman, Shapiro, and Felter 2011, 776; Collier and
Hoeffler 2004, 569; Mampilly 2011, 54–5) or victimizes them (Condra and Shapiro 2012, 183–4; Kalyvas
2006, 111–19; Stoll 1993, 20). What matters is the type
and amount of aid or violence, not which combatant
is responsible for these actions, since civilians cannot
afford to discriminate when their survival is at stake.
We would therefore expect civilians to respond uniformly to similar assistance provided by foreign and
domestic nongovernmental organizations, for example.
Similarly, these theories predict that civilians will provide information to each side equally and routinely,
with the choice of which combatant to inform dictated
only by prevailing levels of control or violence.
Yet the empirical findings in these studies are often inconsistent with this baseline expectation of constant causal effects across combatants. The effects of
aid programs on violence reduction in Afghanistan,
for example, appear to hinge on the ethnic composition of a district, not the level of control or prior
violence (Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2011). Similarly, small-scale aid programs in Iraq have heterogeneous effects across Sunni and non-Sunni dominated
districts (Berman, Shapiro, and Felter 2011). In addition, Condra and Shapiro (2012)’s findings suggest
that Sunni districts exhibit markedly different pre- and
postcivilian casualty patterns of violence than Shia or
mixed districts. In each case, it appears that civilians are
responding asymmetrically, rather than uniformly, to
combatants. If responses are conditional on combatant
identities, then we need to theorize how heterogeneity
in the effects of aid and violence—variation in who is
rewarding or punishing civilians—affects attitudes and
subsequent behavior asymmetrically.
Second, these theories rely on indicators of civilian behavior that are observationally equivalent with
multiple causal mechanisms. As a result, we are left
unable to adjudicate between competing accounts or,
more simply, to explain why a particular relationship
exists. Kalyvas (2006) acknowledges, for example, his
central independent variable, the relative distribution
of combatant control, generates its effects via at least
six different mechanisms, three of them attitudinal in
nature (124–32). Observational data cannot tease apart

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

American Political Science Review

these different mechanisms; only by directly measuring
attitudes can the relative influence of each mechanism
be determined.2 Getting the mechanisms right also has
important policy implications: it matters whether civilians are providing tips to insurgents because they fear
punishment for noncooperation or if they genuinely
support the rebel cause since the policy response is
likely to be different even if rebel control is constant in
these scenarios.

Vol. 107, No. 4

TABLE 1. Home Team Discount: The
Asymmetry of Combatant Support in Civil War
Expected Effect on
Individual’s Support for
Action
Negative
Negative

Actor

Out-Group

In-Group

Out-Group
In-Group

Negative
Neutral

Positive
Neutral/Weak
Positive

Why Identity Matters:
Intergroup Bias and Support for Combatants
We argue that wartime attitudes are shaped by intergroup biases that create durable expectations about the
responsibility and blame for combatant actions toward
the civilian population. These biases lead civilians to
condition their interpretation of events on the perpetrator’s identity (Lyall 2010). As a result, we expect
that support for combatants will depend on the combatant’s identity, as will the effects of actions taken by
the combatants.
We define intergroup bias as the systematic tendency by individuals to evaluate one’s own membership group (the “in-group”) more favorably than a
group one does not belong to (the “out-group”) (Hewstone, Rubin, and Willis 2002, 576; Tajfel 1970; Tajfel
and Turner 1979).3 Positive actions by one’s own ingroup are therefore viewed as arising from the innate
disposition of in-group members while similar actions
by the out-group are interpreted as situational in nature: the out-group was compelled by the situation to
undertake a positive act, whereas the in-group did so
because of its inherent nature. Negative actions by an
in-group, by contrast, are understood as situational in
nature (“forced to be bad”), while negative actions by
the out-group confirm biases about the out-group and
its members as bad actors.
Laboratory experiments have shown that intergroup
bias is especially prevalent in situations where the outgroup possesses a significant power advantage and
members of the in-group feel threatened by the outgroup (Brewer 1999; Esses et al. 2001; Hewstone, Rubin and Willis 2002, 585–6). Such conditions characterize counterinsurgency wars, in which members of a
group are challenging a much stronger out-group such
as a national government or external occupier in a bid
for independence, autonomy, or state capture.4

2 The same criticism holds true for work on civilian victimization,
where mechanisms purporting to explain civilian behavior have proliferated but research designs capable of testing them have not.
3 The literature on social categorization theory, and related fields
such as prejudice, discrimination, and biased assimilation theory, is
enormous. For overviews, see Hewstone, Rubin, and Willis (2002),
Lord, Ross, and Lepper (1979), Paluck and Green (2009), and Tajfel
(2010).
4 This discussion presumes a single in/out-group cleavage, but this
could be complicated by introducing multiple out-groups or in-group
fissures (on this point, see below).

One potential basis for in-group identification is
ethnicity.5 Ethnicity can perform two functions under
wartime conditions. First, it acts as a shorthand or “social radar” (Hale 2008, 34) that allows forward-looking
individuals to anticipate the nature of in- and outgroup actions based on prior interactions or information about ethnic types. In particular, ethnicity can convey information about often unobservable characteristics about other relevant actors like soldiers and rebels,
such as the credibility of their threats and assurances
for (non)compliance. Biases about (non)coethnics can
thus be drawn on to facilitate wartime risk management
by allowing individuals to quickly attach probabilities,
if only crudely, to the expected (re)actions of combatants (Lyall 2010, 15).
Second, and central to our argument, group membership also moderates beliefs about responsibility and
blame for past actions toward the individual and her
group. Viewed through the lens of intergroup bias,
individuals are more likely to punish out-groups for
transgressions, simply confirming biases about the outgroup’s disposition. Harm inflicted by the in-group,
however, carries a different meaning: victimized individuals, and the community at large, may be more
forgiving, since such acts are justified by appeal to
extenuating circumstances that forced the in-group’s
hand. This bias helps explain why external occupiers
are often blamed by victimized individuals for harm
that was actually inflicted by the rebels themselves.
This discussion generates several conditional hypotheses, which are characterized by two types of asymmetry. Table 1 summarizes these hypotheses. First, we
anticipate that harm inflicted by the out-group will be
associated with a sharply negative effect on civilian
attitudes toward the out-group (Hypothesis 1) and a
correspondingly large rally effect for insurgents drawn
from the in-group (Hypothesis 2). Taking Hypotheses
1 and 2 together, we should observe a clear asymmetry
of effect on attitudes that is conditional on the joint
identities of the perpetrator and victim(s).
Second, the in-group’s victimization of civilians will
not result in a transfer of support to the out-group
(Hypothesis 3) but will instead generate only a neutral effect on out-group support. We may observe a
5 Ethnicity is defined as an identity category in which descent-based
attributes are necessary for membership (Chandra and Wilkinson
2008, 517).

681

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

modest negative effect on in-group support (Hypothesis 4), though this should be substantially smaller than
the negative effect on out-group support after civilian
victimization. Here we observe a second, more subtle, asymmetry: Unlike out-group victimization, which
leads to support for the in-group, in-group victimization does not lead to a corresponding increase for the
out-group. We term this the “home team discount”:
insurgents may be less constrained in their abuse of
their fellow in-group members since such actions do
not lead to a corresponding positive effect on support
for the out-group.6
We also hypothesize that as we move from an individual’s direct experience with the combatants to
indirect experiences shared by other in-group members, the effects of victimization on combatant support
should attenuate. Put differently, the magnitude of the
action’s effect, but not its direction, should diminish as
we move from direct experiences to indirect ones provided by secondhand accounts, combatant propaganda,
or rumors (Hypothesis 5).
Simply put, we anticipate that the effects of combatant violence on civilian attitudes are asymmetrical, not
uniform. Violence by the out-group toward civilians
should have negative effects on support for that group
(in many contexts the counterinsurgent or national
government) while having a positive effect on support
for the in-group. In-group violence, by contrast, should
result in only a modest negative effect on in-group support (if any effect is recorded) and should not yield a
transfer of support to the out-group.

THE SURVEY
We adopt a survey methodology that employs a battery of indirect endorsement experiments to measure
attitudes. Endorsement experiments are especially apt
for environments such as Afghanistan, where concerns
about safety, social desirability bias, and nonrandom
refusals to participate are present in spades (Blair
et al. 2013; Bullock, Imai and Shapiro 2011). In addition, there are Afghanistan-specific reasons for concern. First, ISAF, along with other organizations, have
spent billions of dollars over the past decade seeking
to win “hearts and minds.” This situation creates and
reinforces incentives to provide answers perceived to
be acceptable to ISAF, especially if individuals believe
future receipt of aid is conditional on current responses.
Moreover, for cultural reasons individuals are typically
surveyed in public settings. We recorded an average
of two additional individuals present at each survey
session, excluding the respondent and enumerator.7
Finally, our survey firm negotiated access to villages
with local elders, arbaki (militia) commanders, and Taliban leaders. In such situations, indirect questions are
6 We anticipate that similar asymmetry should result when individuals judge positive actions, i.e., giving aid, but a proper test of this
conjecture is beyond the scope of this article.
7 Despite the group setting, only one individual’s answers were
recorded, and enumerators were trained not to interview these
passersby to avoid creating a convenience sample.

682

November 2013

preferable because they yield a higher rate of acceptance among these gatekeepers, thus avoiding biases in
the choice of interview locations.

The Endorsement Experiment
The mechanics of a survey endorsement experiment
are straightforward. Randomly selected respondents
are assigned to a treatment group and asked to express
their opinion toward a policy endorsed by a specific
actor whose support level we wish to measure (here,
ISAF and the Taliban). These responses are then contrasted with those from a control group of respondents
that answered an identical question without the endorsement. Higher levels of enthusiasm for a policy
with an endorsement relative to those without it are
viewed as evidence of support for the endorsing actor.
Since each respondent is assigned only one condition
for any endorsement experiment, it is impossible for
enumerators or others to compare support levels across
different conditions for any individual respondent.
Drawing on electronic and print media, as well as
focus groups and two pretest surveys conducted in
sampled districts, we identified four policies with the
properties desired for an endorsement experiment.
Successful endorsement experiments share four properties (Bullock, Imai, and Shapiro 2011). First, selected
initiatives should be in the same policy space so that
they can be combined for statistical analysis. We select
policies that are all related to domestic policy reforms:
prison reform, direct election of district councils, a
reform of the Independent Election Committee, and
the strengthening of anticorruption policies. Second,
these initiatives should be well known by individuals to
minimize “Don’t Know” responses and to differentiate
support for an endorser from learning about a policy
from the endorsement itself. In the survey, only 4.8% of
respondents replied “Don’t Know,” while refusal rates
were low in all provinces. Third, these initiatives should
actually be endorsed by the particular actors in question so that the questions are realistic and respondents
take them seriously (Barabas and Jerit 2010).8 Finally,
a wide range of views was held by the general public
about these initiatives, enabling us to detect support
for endorsers without suffering from ceiling and floor
effects.
Here, we reproduce one endorsement question, calling for reform of Afghanistan’s notoriously corrupt
prison system, below. The text of the remaining questions is provided in the Appendix.
•

8

Control Condition: A recent proposal calls for the
sweeping reform of the Afghan prison system, including the construction of new prisons in every
district to help alleviate overcrowding in existing
facilities. Though expensive, new programs for inmates would also be offered, and new judges and
prosecutors would be trained. How do you feel
about this proposal?

Deception is also avoided with this approach.

American Political Science Review

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

•

Treatment Condition: A recent proposal by the
Taliban [or foreign forces] calls for the sweeping
reform of the Afghan prison system, including
the construction of new prisons in every district
to help alleviate overcrowding in existing facilities. Though expensive, new programs for inmates
would also be offered, and new judges and prosecutors would be trained. How do you feel about
this proposal?

Plagued by allegations of widespread overcrowding and systematic torture, among other human rights
abuses (Human Rights First 2011), the Afghan prison
system has been publicly criticized by ISAF, the Taliban, and outside observers alike. When polled, only
48% of Afghans claim to place any faith in the Afghan
prison system (The Asia Foundation 2010). As a result,
both ISAF and the Taliban have at various occasions
offered remarkably similar reform programs (Nixon
2011; International Crisis Group 2008).9
We also asked whether individuals would support a
proposal to allow Afghans to vote in direct elections
when selecting leaders for district councils. While technically permitted under Afghanistan’s 2004 Electoral
Law, these elections have not been held to date. In early
2010, the Independent Directorate for Local Governance (IDLG)—a government agency led by a presidential appointee that works with ISAF to coordinate
subnational governance policies—publicly floated the
idea of direct elections, to be held in March 2011 (they
were not). Surprisingly, the Taliban seized upon this
idea in their own propaganda, suggesting that Karzai’s
claims of being democratically elected were hollow
since the Electoral Law was not being followed (Nixon
2011).
Third, we gauged support for reform of
Afghanistan’s Independent Election Committee
(IEC), a much-maligned institution that failed to
prevent widespread fraud in the 2009 Presidential
and 2010 Parliamentary elections. The Afghan public
has also soured on the IEC; only 54% approved of
its performance in 2010 (The Asia Foundation 2010).
ISAF and various international organizations spent
much of the post-September 2010 election period
publicly discussing various reform proposals. Even the
Taliban, which had sought to derail these elections
through violence, raised the IEC as additional
evidence of the Karzai administration’s democracy
deficit (Nixon 2011).
Our final question asked whether individuals would
support strengthening the new Office of Oversight for
Anti-Corruption. Alongside security concerns, there is
perhaps no more salient issue in the minds of Afghans
today than corruption; a full 76% rated it a “major
problem” in 2010, ranking it among the top two domestic concerns of individuals (The Asia Foundation
2010). Both ISAF and the Taliban are aware of the
9 After consultation with our field teams as well as our survey
pretests, we used the term “foreign forces” rather than “ISAF” since
this is the most common term used by Afghans. The term “ISAF,”
by contrast, was unfamiliar to nearly all respondents.

Vol. 107, No. 4

issue’s salience; each has issued repeated public statements concerning corruption in general and the need to
strengthen existing institutions, including the Office of
Oversight, in particular (Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung,
Royal United Services Institute and Transparency International UK 2011; Office of the Special Inspector
General for Afghanistan Reconstruction 2009).
For all four endorsement questions, respondents
were asked to assess their level of support for each
proposal on a five-point scale: “I strongly agree with
this proposal”; “I somewhat agree with this proposal”;
“I am indifferent to this proposal”; “I disagree with this
proposal”; and “I strongly disagree with this proposal.”
Respondents were also permitted to answer “Don’t
Know” or “Refuse to Answer.”
Figure 1 displays the overall (top row) and provincial distributions of responses to the four endorsement
questions. Three patterns are worth noting. First, there
is substantial heterogeneity of interprovince support
for these policies, even independent of particular endorsements. This is encouraging since it suggests that
the questions, taken separately or together, possess
strong discriminatory power. Compare higher support
for prison reform in Logar, for example, with Khost, or
anticorruption efforts in Logar with Helmand. Second,
support differs substantially across Taliban and ISAF
endorsements. In some provinces including the Taliban stronghold of Helmand or the warlord-controlled
Uruzgan, support for Taliban endorsed policies is far
higher than ISAF endorsed policies. In fewer cases,
notably in the key battleground province of Kunar,
ISAF endorsement translates into higher support for at
least two proposals. To further validate whether the endorsement experiments are measuring the support for
the Taliban and ISAF, the Appendix presents a detailed
descriptive analysis, which argues that the patterns we
observe across provinces and districts are consistent
with conditions in each province at the time of the
survey.

Sampling Design and Target Population
Our survey experiment was conducted between 18
January and 3 February 2011 in five provinces of
Afghanistan.10 We chose to concentrate on Pashtunmajority areas rather than a nationwide sample for
three reasons. First, estimation at the village and district level requires a sufficient number of individual
respondents and selected villages, respectively, making a nationwide sample prohibitively expensive if we
scaled up with the same level of coverage. Second,
these areas are not only substantively important—they
10 The survey was implemented by the Opinion Research Center of
Afghanistan (ORCA), an Afghan-owned firm that recruits all of its
enumerators locally. Two pretests were also run, from 25 September
to 5 October and 22 November to 5 December 2010, to pilot different
endorsement policies, to assess sensitivity to question order (none
was found), and to obtain feedback from enumerators about respondent reactions and security issues. Taken together, the pretests had
600 respondents in 40 villages from 10 districts within our sampling
frame. These villages were later removed from our sampling frame
to avoid contaminating results.

683

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

November 2013

Direct Elections

Prison Reform

Independent Election
Commission

Anti−Corruption
Reform

Overall

ISAF
Control
Taliban

(N = 855)

Helmand

(N = 2754)

Taliban

ISAF
Control

Khost

(N = 630)

Taliban
ISAF
Control

Kunar

(N = 396)

Taliban
ISAF
Control

Logar

(N = 486)

Taliban
ISAF
Control
Taliban
(N = 387)

Urozgan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 1. Overall and Within-Province Distribution of Responses from the Endorsement
Experiments

ISAF
Control
Strongly
agree

Agree

Indifferent

Disgree

Strongly
disagree

Don't Know

Refused

Notes: Plots depict the distribution of responses to four policy questions (columns) across three groups (Taliban/ISAF endorsement
groups and control group) for the overall sample (top row) and each province (bottom five rows). Sample sizes are also shown.

encompass the Taliban “heartland,” and are considered
the battleground provinces of the Afghan war—but are
also areas where intergroup bias between Pashtuns and
ISAF should be present. Third, these areas have experience with both ISAF- and Taliban-initiated violence.
Indeed, they represent the high end of the distribution
of violence.
We devised a multistage sampling design to generate
estimates of support for combatants at the individual, village, and district levels. First, five provinces—
Helmand, Khost, Kunar, Logar, and Uruzgan—were
randomly selected from the 13 Pashtun-majority
provinces.11 Next, we randomly selected one-third of
each province’s districts for a total of 21 selected districts. Third, villages were randomly sampled from
11 The remaining eight provinces are Ghazni, Kandahar, Laghman,
Nangarhar, Paktia, Paktika, Wardak, and Zabul.

684

these districts with the restriction that at least 10%
of each district’s villages had to be selected, yielding
204 villages. Households were then chosen within these
villages using the random walk method. Finally, male
respondents aged 16 years and older were randomly
selected from these households using a Kish grid. We
surveyed nine respondents from villages with populations below the mean of sampled villages (about 680
individuals) and 18 in villages with above-mean populations. Table 2 summarizes our sampling design and
the realized sample.
We obtained an 89% participation rate (2,754 out
of 3,097 attempts). Figure 2 presents the distributions of basic demographic variables for our sample
of 2,754 respondents. Our average respondent was
a 32-year-old Pashtun male who was likely married
(77% answered yes), possibly employed (only 58% reported holding a job, with the most frequent occupation

American Political Science Review

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

TABLE 2.

Vol. 107, No. 4

Overview of Multistage Sampling Design
Districts

Provinces

Villages

total sample

Violent events
initiated by

Individuals

total

sample

total

sample Taliban

ISAF

Helmand
Khost
Kunar
Logar
Urozgan

13
13
15
7
5

5
5
5
3
3

1,578
880
818
641
514

61
45
30
40
28

1,411,506
754,262
548,199
384,417
324,100

855 11,806 2,074
630
779
257
396
1,015
166
486
681
137
387
849
314

Total

53

21

4,431

204

3,422,484

2,754 15,130 2,948

8 nonsampled Pashtun provinces 112

0

10,383

0

6,156,571

0 10,007 2,135

Other 21 provinces

0

20,786

0

14,903,729

233

0

3,829 1,225

Notes: The sampling design was conducted as follows: First, five provinces shown in this table were randomly sampled
from a total of 13 provinces with a Pashtun majority. Second, districts were randomly chosen within these districts. Third,
villages were then randomly sampled from within selected districts. Fourth, households were randomly selected within
each of the selected villages. Finally, one male respondent 16 years or older was randomly sampled within each of the
selected households. The table also displays the number of Taliban- and ISAF-initiated violent events during one year
prior to the survey (from 18 January 18 2010 to 17 January 2011) inflicted at the provincial level.

FIGURE 2.

Distribution of Demographic Characteristics
Age

1400
Median

1200

Years of Madrassa
Schooling

Years of Education

Income (Afghanis)

1400

1400

1400

1200

1200

1200

1000

1000

1000

1000

800

800

800

800

600

600

600

600

400

400

400

400

200

200

200

200

0

0

0

<18

25

35

45

60

>60

0

2

4

6

8

10

12+

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7+

<
2k

2−
10k

10−
20k

20−
30k

>
30k

Notes: Bar plots indicate the number of respondents in each category for demographic variables. Dashed lines represent median values.

being “farmer”), and earning between US $1.40 and
$6.97 a day. Respondents typically had little or no
government-provided schooling, and on average had
18 months of madrassa religious schooling. In keeping with the high poverty rates of the sample area,
respondents on average had less than 90 minutes of
electricity a day. Less than half (48%) possessed cellphones, while nearly all (90%) owned a radio, the principal means of obtaining information. Ethnic minorities, mostly Tajiks, made up 6% of the respondents
and had comparatively higher rates of education and
employment.
Since the vast majority of Afghans live in small rural settlements, we avoided sampling from large urban
centers such as district capitals. Our villages thus range
from 29 to 6509 inhabitants (mean: 681 individuals).
We also made the difficult decision to include only male
respondents given the cultural and logistical challenges
of interviewing women in these violent and deeply conservative areas. Our protocol included a special consent form for those aged 16–18 years. We elected to

include these individuals since Afghanistan’s median
age is only 18, a fact typically overlooked by existing
surveys of public opinion.
Of the original 204 villages, only four proved inaccessible due to a combination of Taliban hostility,
the presence of criminal elements and, in two cases,
the inability of the enumerators to locate the selected
village.12 In all cases, village elders, who may have
been members of the Taliban, were first approached
by ORCA district supervisors with the relevant connections to describe the survey and to receive assurances
of enumerator safety. Despite our extraordinary level
of access to Taliban-controlled areas, a testament to
ORCA’s connections as well as its decision to hire locals enumerators, we nonetheless experienced myriad
delays and logistical challenges. These included movement restrictions due to open war-fighting (especially
12 Each village was matched with a similar replacement that the enumerators could select if conditions warranted. These replacements
were used in the four cases mentioned.

685

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 3.

November 2013

Sampled Villages

Notes: Black dots represent randomly sampled villages within five Pashtun-dominated provinces. Red dots represent Taliban- or ISAFinitiated violence in 2010. Three colors are used to distinguish Taliban-controlled (red), government-controlled (blue), or contested
(green) districts.

in Helmand); Taliban and militia roadblocks (typically
appearing after 2 p.m. in most of our districts); and attempted highway robbery. In one case, a clean-shaven
enumerator was pulled from his car in Kunar where,
along with other motorists, his face was blackened with
motor oil by local Taliban to signify his “sinfulness.”13
Our most serious incident involved a district manager
in Uruzgan, who was wounded by a roadside improvised explosive device (IED) the day after placing the
last bundle of completed surveys on a fruit truck (our
method of returning surveys to Kabul).

Measuring Exposure to Violence
Table 2 outlines just how violent these provinces
have been using two different datasets. The number
of attacks initiated by the Taliban and ISAF from
18 January 2010 to 17 January 2011 was extracted
from ISAF’s Combined Information Data Network
Exchange, which records the date, location, and type

13 In a sign of how routine this practice has become, roadside shopkeepers had set up a thriving business charging these unlucky individuals a 100 Afghani “per face” charge for soap and water.

686

of event from 17 specific categories.14 These data show
that the sampled provinces have experienced variable
levels of violence but, on average, are considerably
more violent than other non-Pashtun provinces.
Figure 3 illustrates this pattern by overlaying the
location of sampled villages (as black dots) on the distribution of Taliban and ISAF violence (as red dots)
during 2010. Two spatial patterns emerge immediately.
First, while some of our surveyed villages are within extremely violent areas, other sites experienced relatively
few attacks nearby, giving rise to considerable heterogeneity in the level and type of harm experienced by
respondents. Second, we overlay the spatial distribution of relative control by combatants, as measured
by ISAF, at the district level. Nine of the 21 districts
are defined as under Taliban control (red areas), while
another nine were coded as “contested” (green areas).
Only three districts in our sample are thus considered
under central government or pro-ISAF local control

14 The specific event categories: ISAF (Cache Found, Direct Fire,
Escalation of Force, and Search and Attack) and Taliban (Assassination, Attack, Direct Fire, IED Explosion, IED False, IED
Founded/Cleared, IED Hoax, Indirect Fire, Mine Found, Mine
Strike, SAFIRE, Security Breach, and Unexploded Ordinance).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

American Political Science Review

(blue areas). These data underscore both the difficulties of research in these areas as well as the fact that,
for nearly all respondents, experience with harm at the
hands of ISAF or the Taliban (or both) is not an abstract notion but a realistic possibility—and, for many,
a reality. In the Appendix, we demonstrate that though
these provinces are more violent than non-Pashtun
provinces, the sampled villages exhibit violence levels
similar to nonsampled villages in these districts. We also
show that sampled villages are similar to nonsampled
villages on other substantively important dimensions.
As expected with multistage sampling, in-sample balance at the district and province level is slightly worse,
given the small samples of districts (21) and provinces
(5).
We measure our central explanatory variable, exposure to harm at the hands of ISAF or the Taliban, with
several questions. We distinguish between two models
of harm: direct exposure, in which an individual or his
family are directly affected in the past year; and indirect
exposure, in which individuals are asked about their
awareness of ISAF- or Taliban-inflicted harm within
their manteqa (area) over the same time period. These
self-reports, elicited prior to the endorsement experiments, were preceded by a script that defined “harm”
as both physical injury and property damage. These
questions and detailed descriptive analyses appear in
the Appendix.
Our respondents reported a staggering degree of
exposure to ISAF and Taliban violence. Some 37%
of respondents indicated that they had personally experienced victimization by ISAF, while a similar 33%
acknowledged Taliban victimization (left corner plot in
Figure 10(a) in the Appendix). About 19% of respondents reported that they had been victimized by both
combatants. Nearly 70% of respondents had heard of
ISAF harming civilians in their manteqa, while about
40% had similarly heard of Taliban-inflicted harm in
their area over the past year (left corner plot in Figure
10(b)).
These self-reported measures were followed by
questions about whether the individual had directly
experienced or was indirectly aware of the efforts by
the responsible combatant to make amends for harm
inflicted. These questions are designed to test whether
intergroup biases are irretrievably fixed or, instead,
there remains the possibility of softening, if only partially, these biases in a wartime setting. We are therefore able to classify individual experiences by exposure
to harm (yes/no), by combatant, and whether the individuals were directly approached by the combatants
following victimization or had heard of such efforts
within their manteqa.
To be approached by ISAF signifies that an individual or family received a one-time solatia payment,
typically around $2,500, that absolved ISAF of criminal
liability for civilian casualties or property damage.15 By
contrast, to be approached by the Taliban signifies that
15 In 2010, the U.S. spent $4.44 million on 1114 condolence and battle
damage payments. For our sample, Helmand had the greatest share
of payments (N = 518, $2.8 million), followed by Kunar (N = 48,

Vol. 107, No. 4

the aggrieved party received a funeral oration by the
Taliban extolling the virtues of the fallen individual(s)
as well as modest monthly payments or basic staples
such as kerosene or foodstuffs.
Yet can we rely on these self-reports, especially those
obtained via direct questions? At least two objections
might be raised. First, we may be concerned that questions of wartime harm are simply too sensitive to
elicit truthful answers. This, too, was our initial concern, but one subsequently mitigated when enumerators reported that respondents, far from being reticent
about sharing their experiences, were only too eager
to describe them. In fact, the combined rate of “Don’t
Know” and “Refuse to Answer” for these questions
was only 2% for Taliban and 1% for ISAF-inflicted
harm questions.16
Second, there may be endogeneity between the certain covariates—for example, the level of combatant
control, or an individual’s socioeconomic and cultural
attributes—and survey responses. Individuals did report a much greater (second-hand) awareness of ISAF
victimization than Taliban misdeeds, for example. This
may suggest a greater willingness to speak openly about
ISAF, especially in the Taliban-controlled districts that
represent 43% of our sample. Coethnic bias itself may
also skew these self-reports: Pashtuns could conceivably be more likely to report ISAF victimization than
harm by the almost-exclusively Pashtun Taliban.
Without dismissing the dangers of endogeneity, there
are reasons to believe such concerns may be muted.
First, minimal nonresponse rates were recorded; respondents clearly were not hiding their answers behind
appeals to “Don’t Know” and “Refuse to Answer.”
Second, almost identical levels of victimization were
recorded at the hands of ISAF and the Taliban. Third,
substantial variation exists within Taliban-controlled
and contested districts (and villages), suggesting that
a heavy Taliban presence does not necessarily dictate
pro-Taliban answers. Fourth, the large discrepancy between indirect exposure to ISAF and Taliban victimization is likely due to the Taliban’s own impressive
and far-reaching information campaign. Unlike ISAF,
the Taliban is adept at disseminating news of ISAFinflicted civilian casualties (real or imagined) via cell
phone videos and SMS as well as routine visits to villages. The efforts of ISAF lack the reach of those of the
Taliban and remain largely confined to urban centers
and traditional media.
Finally, to complement respondent self-reports, we
calculated the number of attacks initiated by the Taliban and ISAF occurring in or near each village. To
be consistent with our survey questions, we count only
the attacks that occurred within a five kilometer radius
$129,000), Khost (N = 40, $66,197), Urozgan (N = 15, $76,000), and
Logar (N = 12, $44,000). The mean disbursement was $3,982, though
payment per individual was far lower.
16 The dictates of ethical research ruled out collecting data on the
specific nature of harm inflicted since these details could, in theory,
be used to identify individuals in a given village if these data were
compromised. Note that the emphasis here on physical and property damage may underestimate other forms of intimidation such as
Taliban “night letters.”

687

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

of each village during one year prior to the survey.
This event data offers an extraordinarily fine-grained
measure of violence that can act as an important, if
limited, alternative measure to our self-reported measures of exposure to harm. Intriguingly, we find little
correlation between these individual self-reports and
ISAF’s own dataset of violent events. We constructed
measures of violence using the number of Taliban and
ISAF-initiated events during the year prior to the survey at different radii around these villages and found
little correlation.17 Moreover, there is almost no correlation between these self-reports and ISAF’s own
civilian casualty data. ISAF’s data suggest that the
Taliban are responsible for inflicting 89% of incidents
involving the death or wounding of civilians in 2010
(or, by UNAMA’s estimate, 83% of civilian deaths).
By contrast, our self-report data reveal a much more
even distribution of harm inflicted, with a slightly larger
proportion of respondents reporting victimization at
the hands of ISAF compared to the Taliban.
Several factors may account for this discrepancy.
First, the two measures operationalize harm differently.
ISAF’s data focuses solely on deaths and wounded,
while our self-reports measure both physical harm and
property damage. The latter category, which ISAF does
not collect systematically, is critical because it represents a far more frequent occurrence than the rare
mass-casualty events that command media attention.
Second, ISAF’s coding rules for assigning responsibility for a particular event rely on objective indicators
(e.g., if a Taliban-placed IED kills civilians, then the
Taliban is assigned responsibility for the event) while
the population may not be making the same calculation (e.g., ISAF is blamed for IED-conflicted casualties
since ISAF’s presence made the IED likely). Finally,
these self-reports measure individual-level exposure,
while ISAF’s event data in present form can only be
pegged to the village level. For these reasons, we believe that our self-reports offer a more comprehensive
measure of harm inflicted than ISAF’s own data.

STATISTICAL MODELING
Since all four endorsement experiment questions occupy the same policy space, we employ the methodology developed by Bullock, Imai, and Shapiro (2011)
to combine responses from the four endorsement experiment questions to uncover the underlying latent
levels of support for each combatant. We exploit the
multistage sampling design of our survey experiment
and construct a multilevel model where each level directly corresponds to each stage of sampling. Under
this model, for example, a village-level parameter is
17 The correlations between mean self-reported harm to the individual or family and to others in the respondent’s manteqa area and the
count of the number of violent events at 1-km, 5-km, and 10-km radii
from villages are less than 0.1 in absolute value with few exceptions.
The only strong relationship with violent events is with respondents’
perceptions of harm inflicted to other individuals in their province.
Those responses are strongly correlated (between 0.2 and 0.25) with
violent events within 5 and 10 km of villages.

688

November 2013

assumed to be randomly drawn from a distribution defined at the district level in which the village is situated.
This corresponds to the sampling process, in which
villages are randomly selected from the population
of villages within each of the sampled districts. Our
multilevel modeling approach is thus justified by the
sampling design and allows us to estimate (via partial
pooling) support levels of the Taliban and ISAF and
their difference at all four levels—individuals, villages,
districts, and provinces—providing a wealth of information about the distribution of support. Finally, our
model can also accommodate predictors at each of the
four levels including individual-level survey measures
and village-level violence data.18 The model also allows for spatial correlation at the village, district, and
province levels through the introduction of random
effects at each level.
We now formally define our statistical model. Let i
index survey respondents in our sample (N = 2,754).
In the endorsement experiment, each respondent is
randomly assigned to one of the three conditions with
equal probabilities: Taliban endorsement, ISAF endorsement, and no endorsement (control condition).
We use Ti to denote this randomized “treatment” assignment, which takes one of the three values, i.e., 2 =
Taliban, 1 = ISAF, and 0 = Control. Now, respondent
i’s answer to the jth policy question is represented by Yij
for j = 1, . . . , 4 and is recorded as the five-category ordinal response variable, 5 = Strongly agree, 4 = Agree,
3 = Indifferent, 2 = Disagree, and 1 = Strongly Disagree. Following Bullock, Imai, and Shapiro (2011), we
partially pool all policy questions in order to identify
the common underlying pattern across all questions
rather than idiosyncratic noise associated with a particular question.
First, the individual level is based on the ordered
probit item response model:
Pr(Yij ≤ l | Ti = k) = (αj l − βj (xi + sij k))
where αj1 = 0 and αjl < αj,l+1 for any j and l. In this
model, the latent variable xi represents the degree to
which respondent i is pro or antireform while sijk measures his support level for group k = 1, 2 where sij0 =
0 and a greater value of sijk indicating a higher level of
support. In addition, the “item difficulty” parameter
αjl controls how likely respondents are to agree or
disagree with policy j without endorsement, and the
“discrimination” parameter βj operationalizes the degree to which policy j differentiates between proreform
and antireform respondents.19 We assume βj >0 for any
j because we have written policy questions such that a
respondent’s agreement would imply he/she is supportive of the reform. Thus, in our model, the probability
of agreeing with a reform proposal is a function of the
18 The standard regression approach with “cluster robust standard
error” cannot incorporate the sampling design into the estimation
and also is not suited for data with a complex correlation structure.
19 We find that the estimates of β are similar across policy questions,
j
indicating that each question made a roughly equal contribution to
the final estimates.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

American Political Science Review

two factors: how proreform a respondent is in general
and how supportive he/she is of the assigned group. In
addition, the degree to which responses are affected by
these factors depends on how popular the reform proposal is and how the proposal can discriminate between
proreform and antireform respondents.
We model the two key latent parameters, xi and sijk ,
using the multilevel modeling strategy. Formally, the
model is specified as follows:


indep.
Z
xi ∼ N δvillage[i] + Z
i δ , 1


indep.
Z
2
sij k ∼ N λk,village[i] + Z
i λk , ωk,village


indep.

2
δvillage[i] ∼ N δdistrict[i] + Vvillage[i]
δV , σdistrict


indep.

2
λk,village[i] ∼ N λk,district[i] + Vvillage[i]
λV
,
ω
k
k,district


indep.

2
δdistrict[i] ∼ N δprovince[i] + Wdistrict[i]
λW
,
σ
k
province


indep.

2
λk,district[i] ∼ N λk,province[i] + Wdistrict[i]
λW
k , ωk,province
where Z, V, and W are optional covariates at the individual, village, and district levels, respectively. The
model is completed by assigning noninformative prior
distribution on each parameter (see Table 3 in the appendix).
Specifically, we assume that each respondent is randomly drawn from a population distribution in his own
village, each village is randomly drawn from a distribution of its district, and each district is randomly
drawn from a distribution of its province. At each
level, covariates can be incorporated and the normal
distribution is used. We use Markov chain Monte Carlo
to obtain random draws from the joint posterior distribution of relevant parameters. For each model fit,
which is accomplished via JAGS (Plummer 2009), we
monitor convergence by running three parallel chains
with overdispersed starting values.
Finally, though the number of nonresponses is small,
the pattern of missingness is not completely random.
Thus, we impute these missing values as part of our
model by assuming that the data are missing at random
conditional on village and other covariates at individual
and more aggregate levels. This mitigates the bias and
inefficiency that typically result from list-wise deletion.
Model Specification. We fit two models: a direct exposure model that incorporates a respondent’s (or his
family’s) direct exposure to harm and our key explanatory variables, and an indirect exposure model
that draws on the same covariates, but substitutes direct exposure to harm for an individual’s awareness
of civilians being harmed within his larger manteqa.
Both models include a common set of theoretically
relevant variables (see the Appendix). At the individual level, we include a battery of socioeconomic and
demographic covariates that have been cited as important determinants of support for terrorist or insurgent

Vol. 107, No. 4

groups. These covariates include the respondent’s age,
marital status (Berrebi 2007), income level, years of
state, and madrassa education (Bueno de Mesquita
2005; Krueger and Maleckova 2003; United States
Agency for International Development 2011b), ethnicity, whether the respondent is a Pashtun, and whether
the tribe he affiliates himself with was deemed already
pro-Taliban (Giustozzi 2008, 52–69).20
The models also include village- and district-level
covariates, which include the settlement’s altitude to
account for difficulty of state control (Fearon and
Laitin 2003), population size, and the number of ISAFand Taliban-initiated violent events within five kilometers of the village’s center one year prior to the
survey’s launch.21 District-level covariates include total expenditures on ISAF Commander’s Emergency
Response Program (CERP) short-term aid projects
in 2010 (ISAF CERP Data, 2005-10); the number of
villages in a given district that had received NSP-run
community development projects by the conclusion of
2010; a dummy variable that indicated whether the district was home to a Taliban-run sharia court system;
the area in a given district under opium cultivation
(in hectares) in 2010 (United Nations Office of Drug
Control 2010, 112); the length of paved roads, a proxy
for general economic development; a dummy variable
indicating whether the district neighbored Pakistan,
to control for cross-border flows of arms, insurgents,
and funds; and ISAF’s own measure of the control it
exercised over a given district. We draw on ISAF’s
fourfold index of control, which which rates districts
from “government control or dominant influence” to
“local control or dominant influence” to “contested” to
“Taliban control or dominant influence.” These ratings
were assigned in September 2010, roughly four months
before our survey was fielded.22 ISAF- and Talibandirected aid and service provision variables account for
the possibly offsetting positive actions of combatants
on the battlefield.23

EMPIRICAL FINDINGS
We first examine the relationship between individuallevel traits and attitudes before providing evidence of
the asymmetric effects of violence on combatant support. We then add nuance to our discussion by examining how intra-Pashtun tribal heterogeneity, along with
variation within the Taliban itself, also condition attitudes. Finally, we explore whether postharm mitigation
efforts by ISAF and the Taliban are capable of overcoming intergroup bias in a wartime setting. Given our
quantities of interest, we rely on graphs rather than
20 For our purposes, the pro-Taliban tribes are the Noorzai, Zadran,
Gheljay, and Durrani.
21 These results were robust to the substitution of violent events
within one- or ten-kilometer radii, of violent events within five kilometers for a longer period of time from 2006 to 2010, and of civilian
casualties for the same January–December 2010 period.
22 ISAF “Insurgent Focus” Briefing Slide, dated September 2010.
23 As a robustness check, we reran our models without the village
and district-level covariates. The results are substantively similar and
therefore we present results from the hierarchical models only.

689

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

November 2013

Age

Support for Taliban

Years of Madrassa
Schooling

Years of Education

2

2

1

Income (Afghanis)

2

2

●

●

1

1

●

●

1

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

0

●

0

●
●
●
●
●

●

0

0

●
●
●

−1

−1

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

−1

●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

−1

●

−2

−2

−2

−2

−3

−3

−3

−3

10

Support for ISAF

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 4. Bivariate Relationships between Demographic Variables and Individual-level Support
for the Taliban and ISAF

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

0

2

2

1

1

2

0

−1

−1

6

8

10 12+

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7+

2

●
●

●
●

<
2k

●
●

●
●

2−
10k

10−
20k

20−
30k

>
30k

20−
30k

>
30k

2

1
●

●

●

0

4

●
●
●
●
●

●

1
●
●

●

0

0

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

−1

●

●
●

●
●

−2

−2

−3

−3
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

−1

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

−2

●

●
●
●

−2

●

−3
0

2

4

6

8

10 12+

●
●

●

●
●

●

<
2k

2−
10k

10−
20k

−3
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7+

Notes: Support estimates are given in terms of the standard deviation of ideal points. For age (the left column), dots represent
respondents and the lowess curve is fitted as a solid line. For remaining plots, box plots are used: the width of each box is proportional
to (the square root of) the number of respondents for each value of the demographic variables.

coefficient tables to demonstrate our main empirical
findings.24

Main Results
Our multilevel models generate estimates of a respondent’s level of support for the particular combatant;
estimates are measured in terms of the (posterior)
standard deviation of respondents’ preferences within
a single dimensional policy space (i.e., ideal points). If a
respondent is assigned to the control group, no estimate
is generated. Imagine, for example that a respondent
is neutral toward the proposed reform initiative. If this
individual’s support level for the Taliban was a “1,”
then it implies that a Taliban endorsement can shift
this individual’s ideal point by one standard deviation
in the proreform direction.
Attitudes Toward Combatants. Who is more likely to
support the Taliban or ISAF? As an initial test of the
validity of our survey instrument, we plot individuallevel support estimates from the direct exposure model
against key demographic covariates in Figure 4. We
note that estimated support for both combatants decreases with age, though the Taliban enjoy more support among the youth than ISAF. This may be some24 The posterior mean and standard deviation for each coefficient in
our multilevel models are reported Table 3 in the Appendix.

690

what surprising given the Taliban’s public image as a
conservative gerontocracy, but the war has created opportunities for advancement among the youth, and the
Taliban appears to be given credit for this mobility. Predictably, support for ISAF—or, more bluntly, decreased
dislike for ISAF—is associated with increased education and with fewer years spent in madrassa education.
The reverse is true for the Taliban: its estimated support levels rise with years of madrassa education and
fall with years of government education. Finally, per
capita income is positively associated with estimated
ISAF support (or, again, less dislike of ISAF) while
there appears to be no clear pattern between income
and Taliban support.
Attitudes by Levels of Victimization. What are the
average support levels for ISAF and the Taliban among
those harmed by these combatants? As an initial investigation of the effects of victimization, we estimate
the level of support for each combatant according to
whether respondents reported harm by ISAF only,
the Taliban only, by both combatants, or by neither
(Figure 5).25
25 In our empirical analysis, we assume that the effects of harm by
each combatant are additive in nature when estimating the level of
support for those harmed by both combatants. For the sake of clarity
of analysis, we did not include an interaction term in our models.
Future research could relax this assumption, however, and generate

American Political Science Review

Estimated Support Levels for Each Combatant by Victimization Type

Support for ISAF

None

Taliban
Only

ISAF
Only

Victimization
Support for the Taliban

Victimization
1.0

Both

0.5
0.0
−0.5

●

●

●

●

−1.0

1.0

None

Taliban
Only

ISAF
Only

Both

0.5
●

0.0
●

−0.5

●

●

−1.0

Notes: We derive and then plot the posterior predicted mean support level from our multilevel models with 95% confidence intervals.

1.0
0.5
0.0

Self or
family
●
● ●

−0.5
−1.0

Manteqa
(area)

●

Victimization
by ISAF
by Taliban
Change in Support
for Taliban

Victimization
by ISAF
by Taliban
1.0
0.5

●

0.0
−0.5
−1.0

●
●

●

Difference in Change
in Support (Taliban − ISAF)

FIGURE 6. Estimated Effects of ISAF and Taliban Victimization on Support Levels for Each
Combatant

Change in Support
for ISAF

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 5.

Vol. 107, No. 4

Victimization
by ISAF
by Taliban
1.0
0.5

●
●

0.0
−0.5

● ●

−1.0

Notes: The right panel presents the differences between the results in the middle and left panels. Posterior means of coefficients derived
from multilevel models are plotted with 95% confidence intervals.

We find that most respondents are not supporters of
either combatant: among those not harmed by either
combatant, respondents exhibit a strongly negative effect toward ISAF (a −0.62 effect in standard deviations
of the ideal points) and are only slightly less negative about the Taliban (at −0.29 standard deviations of
the ideal points). Interestingly, those respondents who
were harmed by ISAF only or by both ISAF and the
Taliban exhibit a positive effect toward the Taliban (at
0.27 standard deviations and 0.15 standard deviations,
respectively). Respondents who had been harmed only
by ISAF or the Taliban were the least supportive of
these combatants (at −0.89 standard deviations for
ISAF and −0.40 standard deviations for the Taliban),
though the magnitude of the effect is clearly asymmetrical across combatants.
Asymmetrical Effects of Victimization. We now provide the key evidence to support our central claim that
the effects of violence on civilian attitudes are conditional on combatant identity. Figure 6 illustrates the
estimated average effects of ISAF (left panel) and Talboth theoretical predictions and empirical tests that examine how
exposure to harm by multiple combatants affects the direction and
magnitude of the asymmetry we observe here.

iban victimization (middle panel) on ISAF and Taliban
support at two levels: the individual/family (solid circles) and the manteqa (open circles). In the right panel,
the net differences between the effects of victimization
on support for the Taliban and ISAF are also provided.
A number of important observations stand out. First,
as expected by Hypothesis 1, we note that ISAF victimization is associated with a significant negative effect on ISAF support. ISAF victimization is also associated with a substantively large positive effect on
Taliban support (Hypothesis 2). These data confirm
that harmed individuals are both punishing the outgroup for inflicting harm and are transferring support
to the out-group as expected if intergroup biases are in
play.
Second, Taliban victimization has no clear effect
on support for ISAF. As expected by Hypothesis
3, we do not observe a blossoming of support for
ISAF after Taliban-inflicted harm, suggesting that the
out-group is not rewarded for its (relative) restraint.
Moreover, Taliban victimization itself only slightly decreases Taliban support and certainly does not approach the penalty on ISAF support witnessed after
ISAF victimization. While it would be incorrect to
conclude that the Taliban can victimize civilians with
impunity, they appear to enjoy a much larger cushion of

691

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

public support than does ISAF, for whom civilian casualties are associated with a steep negative effect on
support.
Third, we observe the hypothesized asymmetry of
effects between ISAF victimization on Taliban support
(middle panel, left column) and Taliban victimization
on ISAF support (left panel, right column). This difference is statistically significant and is estimated to
be 0.37 standard deviation of the ideal points (with
the 95% confidence interval of [0.02, 0.73]) at the
individual/family level. The right panel in Figure 6 underscores the asymmetry between the effects of ISAF
victimization on relative support for the combatants
(Taliban support minus ISAF support) and those associated with Taliban violence. Once again, it is apparent that while ISAF victimization creates a substantial
positive effect on net Taliban support, Taliban victimization generates at best only a very modest positive
effect on relative support for the out-group.
Are these results driven by personal exposure to
harm, as suggested by Hypothesis 5, or are indirect
influences equally as important? Returning to Figure 6,
we observe that manteqa-level effects (as represented
by open circles) of ISAF victimization are attenuated
when compared with individual self-reports. We find
that the net difference in the effect of ISAF violence
on ISAF support between the individual and manteqa
level is nearly statistically significant, with a 0.203 (95%
confidence interval at [0, 0.65]). We do not observe a
similar pattern of attenuation for Taliban violence, in
part because the individual-level effects are already
small. While the general pattern of effects is therefore
similar across individual and manteqa levels, the magnitude of estimated effects on support levels for each
combatant is typically diminished at the manteqa level,
and significantly so for ISAF.
One interesting wrinkle also emerges from these
findings: both Taliban and ISAF endorsements are, in
some cases and regions, associated with reductions in
support for the proposed reform relative to the control endorsement.26 While caution is warranted, one
interpretation of this result is simply that the control
most closely resembles an official (government) endorsement. What we may be measuring, then, is the
relative shift in support for Taliban and ISAF combatants associated with victimization against a more
general backdrop of war weariness in which neither
combatant is especially favored. That said, however,
since support in war is relative, not absolute, it is also
clear that the Taliban do enjoy a greater measure of
support, and more tolerance of inflicting harm on civilians, than ISAF.
Tribal Analysis. Support for combatants is best cast
as a continuum (Petersen 2001, 8), rather than a simple (and misleading) choice of “pro-Taliban” or “antiISAF.” We therefore add nuance to our discussion
26 Our breakdown of responses by question and province are provided in the Appendix. Since the control provides the baseline for
assessing ISAF and Taliban endorsements, support for the control is
measured as the reverse of the Taliban or ISAF endorsement.

692

November 2013

of intergroup bias by exploring intragroup variation.
Several Pashtun tribes, for example, have largely (and
publicly) declared in favor of the Taliban, while others, often in conflict with pro-Taliban tribes, have remained neutral or in a few instances sided against these
tribes. While we cannot assume homogeneity of views
among all members of a particular tribe, we can explore whether the attitudes of individuals from these
pro-Taliban Pashtun tribes diverge from those of their
non-Taliban aligned counterparts.
In particular, we expect that individuals from proTaliban tribes are more likely to be forgiving of Taliban
victimization given their prior identification with the
Taliban. The negative effects of ISAF victimization are
also likely to be greater in magnitude for this subset,
though if ISAF support is already low we may observe
a floor effect given that support for ISAF may not sink
any further. In each case, victimization is likely to confirm the intergroup bias that negative in-group actions
are situational in nature while those of the out-group
and its members are dispositional.
We begin with the effects of ISAF victimization on
support for ISAF and the Taliban among pro-Taliban
tribe (solid circles) and non-pro-Taliban tribe (solid
squares) members, then turn to how Taliban violence
affects support for ISAF and the Taliban itself. We
provide a graphic interpretation of these results in
Figure 11 in the Appendix.
We find, for example, that ISAF victimization has
a more pronounced negative effect on ISAF support
among pro-Taliban tribe members than their non-proTaliban tribal counterparts. Notably, however, the difference itself is fairly modest at −0.328 standard deviations (95% confidence interval at [−0.904, 0.168]) and
statistically insignificant. The effects of ISAF violence
on support for the Taliban are also different across
subgroups. Here, it is the non-pro-Pashtun tribes that
record the largest positive effect on support for the Taliban after experiencing ISAF victimization. This result
is likely due to two factors. First, it is probable that
since pro-Taliban tribes have already decided for the
Taliban, their support is subject to a ceiling effect that
limits the magnitude of the positive shock to Taliban
support. Second, this result suggests that ISAF violence
has an outsized effect on individuals who believe that
they are either neutral or (more rarely) who have sided
with ISAF. The difference between these two groups
is striking at −0.604 standard deviations (with a 95%
confidence interval of [−1.09, −0.23]), suggesting that
ISAF-inflicted harm has a large effect on members of
non-Taliban-aligned tribes and their support for the
Taliban.
By contrast, Taliban victimization has broadly similar effects on ISAF support for both pro-Taliban and
nonaligned Pashtuns. This result is consistent with our
expectation that intergroup bias prevents a transfer of
support from the in-group to the out-group. Where
we observe divergence between these two subgroups
is in the effects of Taliban violence on Taliban support. Members of pro-Taliban tribes appear not only
to tolerate but embrace harm, as witnessed by the
positive effect of Taliban harm on Taliban support. By

American Political Science Review

0.5
●

0.0
●

−0.5
−1.0
●

Change in Support
for Taliban

1.0

Experience with Violence
by ISAF
by Taliban
1.0
●

0.5
0.0

●

−0.5
−1.0

Victimization with No Approach

Effect of Being Approached

Difference in Change in
Support (Taliban − ISAF)

Estimated Effects of Victimization and Subsequent “Approach” by Combatants on
Experience with Violence
by ISAF
by Taliban

Change in Support
for ISAF

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 7.
Support

Vol. 107, No. 4

Experience with Violence
by ISAF
by Taliban
1.0

●

0.5
0.0
−0.5

●

−1.0

Victimization and Approach

Notes: The right panel presents the differences between the results in the middle and left panels. Posterior means of the corresponding
coefficients are plotted along with 95% confidence intervals.

contrast, Taliban violence has a slightly negative effect
on non-pro-Taliban tribal members’ support for the
insurgent organization.27
These findings deepen our previous discussion by
suggesting that combatant violence has asymmetric effects across different Pashtun tribal affiliations. ISAF
victimization clearly has a disproportionate effect on
support for the Taliban among non-pro-Taliban tribal
members. Taliban victimization, by contrast, has a positive (and large) effect on pro-Taliban tribal members,
suggesting that the Taliban possess a far higher freedom of action—to include causing civilian casualties—
among their supporters than ISAF.
Effects of Post-Harm Mitigation Efforts. Can combatants offset the negative effects of their violence by rendering postharm assistance? We offer
a preliminary exploration of this issue in Figure 7,
which presents the estimated combined effect of being harmed but not subsequently approached (circle), the effect of being approached (square), and
the combined effect of victimization and receiving post-harm assistance on attitudes toward the
combatants.
Two broad conclusions stand out. First, postharm
mitigation efforts by both combatants are associated
with a marked negative effect on support for the other
combatant. Taliban victimization alone has a small
positive effect on attitudes toward ISAF (as reported
above) but, once aid has been proffered, the effect
is a substantially negative effect on attitudes towards
ISAF. Similarly, experience with ISAF victimization
alone is associated with a positive effect on support
for the Taliban. Yet if aid has been provided by ISAF,
the result is a large negative effect on Taliban support (second column). Indeed, the net difference in
effect between individuals who were harmed but not
27 The difference between the two groups is statistically significant
at 0.57 standard deviations (with a 95% confidence interval of [0.05,
1.14]).

approached by ISAF and those who were harmed and
then approached is a highly significant −1.00 standard
deviation movement away from a pro-Taliban position
(95% confidence interval of [−1.43, −0.53])
An optimistic take on these results would suggest
that hearts and minds can in fact be swayed, if not
bought outright, via postharm mitigation efforts. Yet a
second finding is also important: these efforts appear
to have little effect on support for the actual combatant that rendered the assistance. While ISAF does
appear more successful at generating modest positive
effects after its efforts, there is much less positive movement in attitudes toward the combatant responsible
for the victimization than there is a shift away from
the other combatant. In this situation, postharm aid
appears less about persuading civilians to move toward
one’s side as it is about shifting away from the rival
combatant.
We must also be careful not to overstate the finding
about the effects of ISAF assistance. There is a severe
selection problem at work here, because ISAF managed to “approach” only 16% of those who claimed
that they had been harmed by ISAF. By contrast, the
Taliban “approached” over 60% of those who selfidentified as suffering Taliban victimization. ISAF’s
decision-making on the extension of condolence and
battle damage payments is often haphazard, but is at
least partly conditioned on anticipated reception in a
given village (Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict 2010b). The more likely a unit is to receive armed
resistance from aggrieved villagers, the less likely ISAF
will return to disburse payments. Given closer media
scrutiny, mass casualty events are more likely to be
followed by postharm mitigation efforts. Aggrieved individuals in small-claims cases, by contrast, are often
forced to go to military bases to receive their funds, discouraging all but the most determined and risk acceptant claimants (Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict 2010a). As a result, the finding regarding ISAF’s
ability to use condolence payments to overcome
intergroup bias relies on a small subset of individuals

693

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

who were specifically selected to receive this assistance.
Indeed, these individuals may be the ones most likely
to be swayed by ISAF’s efforts.28
Summary. Taking these findings as a whole, we uncover substantial evidence to support claims that the
effects of violence on attitudes are conditional on perpetrator’s identity. ISAF’s violence is strongly associated with a negative effect on attitudes toward ISAF,
while Taliban violence only has a marginally negative
effect on Taliban support. Similarly, ISAF victimization
leads to a marked positive effect on Taliban support
but, consistent with our expectations, Taliban victimization results in only a small positive effect on ISAF
support. These asymmetries are often powerful among
a subset of individuals, namely, those who claim membership in publicly pro-Taliban Pashtun tribes. Finally,
these results appear to be largely driven by personal
experiences with harm, rather than indirect knowledge
of harm inflicted within an individual’s manteqa, especially for ISAF violence. This finding reinforces the
need to devise and test our arguments about civilian
victimization at the most microlevel unit possible, that
of the individual, rather than assuming that macrolevel
effects scale down to the individuals in a given geographic space.

Alternative Explanations
Our findings strongly suggest that intergroup biases are
responsible for the observed asymmetries of effects of
combatant actions on civilian attitudes. Yet what of
alternative explanations? We consider four alternative
identity-based theories and three additional explanations that emphasize battlefield factors such as the distribution of aid, relative control by the combatants, and
Taliban service provision.
Other Identity-Based Accounts. We might imagine,
for example, that the observed asymmetry of effects
arises from a sense of betrayal among civilians. Perhaps these individuals expect that ISAF, but not the
insurgents, will protect them, a belief that leads them to
punish ISAF for violating its perceived commitment to
safeguard the population. While intuitive, it is apparent
that few believe ISAF will protect them from harm; in
fact, the opposite is true. We posed the question “In
your view, how often do foreign forces [Taliban] take
precautions to avoid killing or injuring innocent civilians during their operations?” Possible answers were
as follows: always (3), sometimes (2), rarely (1), and
never (0). The mean response for ISAF was 0.56; for
the Taliban, a 1.92, a substantial difference.29 These
28 Intriguingly, a study of 155 recipients of USAID’s Afghan Civilian
Assistance Program I (ACAP I)—which provides cash grants and
small bundles of household items to victims of ISAF and Taliban
violence—found that satisfaction with this aid hinged on who had
inflicted the violence. Only 45% of recipients were satisfied with
ACAP assistance after experiencing ISAF victimization, compared
with nearly 85% of recipients after experiencing insurgent violence.
See United States Agency for International Development 2011a, 10.
29 This difference is significant at p = 0.000, t
5506 = 56.55.

694

November 2013

findings are stunning when we consider that the Taliban
killed an estimated 2,080 Afghan civilians in 2010 alone
while ISAF was deemed responsible for 440. Yet the
perception remains that ISAF, rather than the Taliban,
is wielding violence indiscriminately, suggesting that
individuals in our sample area do not believe that ISAF
is protecting them.30
These findings are also consistent with arguments
that the post-2001 status reversal experienced by Pashtuns in Afghanistan’s ethnic hierarchy has created high
levels of support for the Taliban (for status reversal
arguments, see especially Petersen 2002, 40–61). Yet
while it is true that foreign-imposed regime changes
often upend existing institutions, this is less the case
in Afghanistan than elsewhere. The Karzai-led government created by the Bonn Agreement (December 2001) actually represented a return to prior patterns of ethnic hierarchy, not a decisive break. The
current Pashtun-dominated executive has echoes in
earlier Durrani Pashtun regimes, including the rule
of the “Iron Amir” (1880–1901), under Mohammed
Nadir Shah (1930–79), and the Taliban era itself. Despite (modest) local score settling, Pashtuns were not
collectively punished for their earlier support of the
Taliban, and the new Afghan constitution itself was ratified unanimously (Barfield 2010, 272–93). Given that
dissatisfaction with the Karzai government transcends
ethnic lines, it is unlikely that current Taliban support
among Pashtuns—itself variable, not constant, in our
data—is due to status reversal.
A third alternative explanation privileges revenge
motives arising from the Pashtun-specific code of ethics
known as Pashtunwali. Consisting of nine principles,
Pashtunwali norms call for aggrieved individuals to
take revenge (badal) upon a wrongdoer while acting
bravely (tureh) to defend their property, family (especially women), and honor (Johnson and Mason 2008;
Tomsen 2011, 47–54). This argument about culture
dictating attitudes stumbles, however, over two issues.
First, it is not clear why attitudes would be asymmetrical among harmed individuals without invoking a prior
claim about intergroup bias. In principle, revenge seeking should lead to symmetrical effects of violence on
civilian attitudes since the obligation to seek redress
is not directed solely against non-Pashtuns. Second,
there is considerable intra-Pashtun tribal differences
in how their attitudes are influenced by combatant violence and subsequent restitution efforts. It is neither the
case that Pashtun attitudes are monolithic toward the
combatants, nor are these attitudes uniformly affected
by combatant actions.
Finally, these asymmetrical effects remain regardless
of an individual’s level of prior exposure to ISAF. Contact theory (Allport 1954; Cook 1971) suggests that,
30 According to UNAMA’s figures, the Taliban has been responsible
for the bulk of civilian deaths since at least 2008. In 2008, ISAF was
responsible for 828 deaths to 1,160 by the Taliban; in 2009, ISAF
inflicted 596 deaths, compared with 1,631 by the Taliban (see United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan 2011). This raises a key
methodological problem for observational studies if the objective
coding of responsibility and the perceived blame by the victimized
individuals are not highly correlated.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

American Political Science Review

under certain conditions, intergroup bias—and, specifically, the lessening of out-group derogation—can be
reduced via frequent, positive interaction with members of the out-group. Current ISAF counterinsurgency
doctrine also stresses the importance of face-to-face interaction with local populations to build trust and shape
attitudes. There is little evidence to support this claim
in our context, however. To begin with, the conditions
cited as necessary for contact theory to be operative are
daunting. These include equal status between the interacting parties, shared goals, sustained intimate contact,
and the absence of competition (Paluck and Green
2009, 346), a set of conditions absent in Afghanistan.
We also directly tested this claim with a question that
measured the respondent’s frequency of prior interaction with ISAF forces (Frequency). Frequency was
statistically significant and negatively associated with
ISAF support, exactly the opposite of contact theory’s
predictions.
Battlefield Dynamics: Aid, Control, and Taliban Service Provision. How do other theoretical explanations fare in explaining civilian attitudes? Surprisingly,
we find little evidence that district-level variables hold
weight in explaining attitudes toward either combatant.
Caution is warranted when interpreting these results, to
be sure, because there are only 21 districts in our sample. Moreover, while our sample is randomly drawn,
combatant decisions to allocate aid and services and
to wield violence are not, suggesting that some endogeneity between district-level variables and attitudes
may be present.31
Economic assistance appears to hold little sway over
attitudes, whether in the form of quick, 30-day Commanders’ Emergency Response Program (CERP) initiatives or more deliberate National Solidarity Program (NSP) community grants. This holds true if we
replace our preferred CERP measure, dollars spent per
district in 2010, with the number of CERP initiatives
undertaken per district in 2010. Similarly, our measure
of NSP progress, namely the number of villages in a
given district that received NSP grants up until December 2010, is not associated with any effect on civilian attitudes. While data limitations are undoubtedly
present, especially given poor CERP data management
practices, a district-level analysis may nonetheless be
justified given the possibility of spillover between villages in a given area for certain types of aid.
The apparent ineffectiveness of the US $1 billion
National Solidarity Program deserves a closer look,
not least because it partly conflicts with Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov (2011)’s careful NSP evaluation.
These authors conclude that NSP receipt is associated with a modest improvement in respondents’ attitudes toward both local and central governments in
8 of 10 targeted districts. This positive effect disappears, however, in the two most violent and Pashtundominated districts in their sample, a finding that jibes
with our own (Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2011,
31 We provide a graphical summary of these findings in Figure 12 in
the Appendix.

Vol. 107, No. 4

4). Broadly speaking, the different conclusions about
NSP effectiveness stem from sampling decisions: our
21 districts are all majority Pashtun and much more
violent than average (Tajik majority) districts, while
Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov restrict their sample
to mostly Tajik or Hazara dominated areas (6 of 10
districts in their sample) where only 3% of respondents
indicate that their village had experienced an attack in
the past year (Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2011,
16).32 Moreover, these differences may also arise from
different methodological choices: we chose to rely on
endorsement experiments to minimize social desirability bias, while the NSP survey evaluation relied on
direct questions.
We also find only modest evidence for the presumed
relationship between the distribution of combatant
control and civilian attitudes. While being located in
a government-controlled district is predictably associated with a negative effect on Taliban support, no level
of combatant control is associated with any statistically significant effect on support for either combatant.
ISAF support is lowest, and Taliban support highest, in
districts that are deemed “Taliban controlled” by ISAF
relative to “contested” districts. This is consistent with
the theoretical predictions of Kalyvas (2006), though
the level of support for the Taliban is surprisingly low
and, indeed, does not reach positive values for most of
the districts in the analysis.
Taliban support is also consistently lower in districts
marked by high opium cultivation. While the Taliban
do provide farmers with security in exchange for a
share of revenue from opium sales, it is possible that
more draconian Taliban measures—cultivation quotas
enforced through violence, increasing levels of taxation, and leverage due to rising farmer indebtedness—
account for these lower levels of Taliban support. Unexpectedly, the districts that were earliest to witness
mobile Taliban courts established have lower net support for the Taliban, though this difference is not statistically significant. This difference is perhaps due to the
fact that the Taliban chose these locations to win over
local populations, not to reward areas where support
was already assured.
Finally, we examined whether districts that border
Pakistan differ in their levels of support for the Taliban than nonborder districts. One might imagine, for
example, that these border districts have a higher concentration of foreign fighters than more distant districts
such as Helmand or Uruzgan, and thus the meaning of
“Taliban” may differ regionally.33 We therefore plot
in the appendix the mean differences in support for
Taliban and ISAF, along with the net difference, in
the final column of Figure 12. There is little difference
in support for either combatant between border and
nonborder districts.

32 Note, too, that Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov included female
respondents in 406 of their 500 villages, something that was not
feasible in our sampling environment.
33 We thank a reviewer for this suggestion.

695

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

Village-Level Analysis

November 2013

These findings also pose a substantial challenge to studies that presume individual- or group-level motives
and mechanisms but test these arguments with data
aggregated to larger territorial units such as villages or
districts. As noted above, our violent event datasets are
only weakly correlated with respondent perceptions of
harm. This lack of a relationship carries over into our
multilevel model, in which ISAF and Taliban violent
events from January to December 2010 are not associated with respondent attitudes toward the combatants
regardless of whether we rely on a 1-, 5-, or 10-km
radius around the village. Simply put, once we control
for variance at the individual level and varying intercepts at the village, district, and province level, other
factors at the village and district levels are not strongly
associated with combatant support.34
To be sure, not every research question requires
individual-level data, and we must be cautious when
assessing causality in the absence of a clear identification strategy. Yet these nonfindings suggest that the
now-standard practice in civil war studies of relying
on aggregated event counts may be problematic. At a
minimum, these data are unlikely to be useful in testing
the attitudinal mechanisms thought to link violence to
behavior. Even studies that draw on fine-grained data
on civilian casualties (Condra et al. 2011) are likely
to be misleading if these events are only loosely connected with civilian perceptions or are aggregated into
larger territorial units far removed from the victimized
individuals. In other words, civilian attitudes may represent a substantial omitted variable in most statistical
accounts of civil war dynamics. These mistaken inferences are likely compounded if the event data are not
disaggregated by perpetrator and victim identities, thus
missing the conditional nature of violence’s effects on
civilian attitudes.

related with support for that group and does not predict
that these effects are conditional on the perpetrator’s
identity.
It is worthwhile to note that information may be
unreliable, and uncertainty rife, in wartime settings.
Individuals themselves may not know which combatant
to blame for the harm inflicted, especially if they are literally caught in the crossfire. Individuals may also be biased against the outsider, leading to the over-reporting
of harm by the out-group. Under this scenario, blame
attribution may be at work.35 Nevertheless, in contrast
to our intergroup bias argument, this alternative theory
does not predict the asymmetry in the marginal effects
of victimization. Instead, a theory of blame attribution
would suggest that the effects of victimization are uniform across combatants even though self-reports may
incorrectly attribute some of the harm inflicted to the
out-group.
A second concern is that since groups vary along
multiple dimensions, not simply ethnicity, these differences in political objectives and military strategies
may matter more than intergroup bias. In general, addressing such a concern would require the researcher
to manipulate certain aspects of the identity and/or
actions of combatants while keeping the ethnicity difference constant. Clearly, this is a difficult task in a
wartime context. In our case, we can rule out specific
explanations. For example, one may hypothesize that
since ISAF is an external intervener, it possesses a
shorter time horizon than the Taliban, the local ingroup, and thus individuals will respond differently to
their actions. However, this hypothesis is unlikely to
hold in our case. While external interveners can of
course withdraw, this prospect does not necessarily
predict asymmetrical effects of harm. Moreover, an
individual’s “shadow of the future” would also have to
loom exceedingly large for these distant concerns to
trump short-term survival calculations.36

Endogeneity

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Two potential objections to our intergroup bias theory
should also be addressed here. First, it is possible that
perceptions of harm inflicted are themselves driven by
prior attitudes toward the combatants. Willingness to
assign blame for harm may therefore be endogenous to
preexisting beliefs, particularly in circumstances where
the actual identity of the perpetrator is unknown. Addressing this issue is difficult due to the absence of completely reliable measures of violence inflicted on individuals. In addition, research in conflict settings is typically conducted after repeated interactions between
combatants and civilians have already occurred. Nevertheless, our theory generates a clear set of predictions
about asymmetrical effects, whereas claims about endogeneity between attitudes and perceptions of harm do
not. Specifically, the presence of endogeneity implies
that self-reported harm by any group is negatively cor-

The premise that civilians in wartime, trapped between
dueling combatants, are driven solely by material inducements and immediate or threatened punishment
remains a central facet of our theories of civil war
dynamics. Our evidence suggests a more complicated
picture: civilians possess strong intergroup biases that
condition how violence will affect support for combatants. Moreover, these effects are asymmetrical, not
uniform, in nature. In Afghanistan, ISAF’s violence is
associated with a negative effect on attitudes toward
ISAF, while Taliban violence does not produce a similarly negative effect. Moreover, ISAF’s victimization
is associated with a positive effect on Taliban support;
Taliban victimization, by contrast, does not lead to a
transfer of support to ISAF. This asymmetrical “home
team discount” is especially strong among self-declared

34

Note, too, that this criticism extends to other key village-level data
such as elevation and population size, which are not significantly
associated with support for combatants in any of our models.

696

35 We thank an associate editor and a reviewer for raising this possibility.
36 Our survey also preceded President Barack Obama’s June 2011
announcement of the American withdrawal from Afghanistan.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

American Political Science Review

pro-Taliban tribes. Nor are these effects fleeting. These
asymmetrical effects persist even when controlling for
key factors such as each combatant’s level of control
over a district, their prior patterns of violence, and
their efforts to provide economic assistance and basic
services.
These findings suggest several implications for the
current war in Afghanistan and, more generally, for the
study and practice of counterinsurgency. First, rebels
who are in-group members possess a measure of forgiveness not afforded the counterinsurgent when it victimizes civilians. In fact, ISAF violence has most likely
reinforced intergroup biases, making it even more difficult to sway, let alone win, “hearts and minds.” Nor
does it appear that aid programs, whether the massive
National Solidarity Program or small-scale Commander’s Emergency Response Program funds, are making substantial in-roads on this task. To be sure, more
research is required, given that our sample included
only 21 districts. Yet these programs do appear insufficient to provide the kinds of material inducements
that might overcome intergroup biases. The durable
nature of these biases also suggests they will persist
through 2014, complicating ISAF’s planned exit from
Afghanistan.
Our survey also provides a proof of concept for
the utility of experimental methods in violent settings.
Scholars, nongovernmental organizations, and military
forces alike could benefit from replacing direct questions with indirect survey techniques such as endorsement and list experiments. In Afghanistan, for example, ISAF has devoted tens of millions of dollars to
assessing public opinion on a wide array of sensitive
issues using direct questions, including on corruption
and support for the Afghan government, Taliban, and
Afghan National Security Forces. Given the methodological and ethical issues associated with direct questions in wartime environments, such efforts are unlikely to yield credible data on public opinion that
policymakers require. At the other extreme, the World
Bank’s signature Living Standards Measurement Survey avoids sensitive topics and typically does not record
data on exposure to violence, even when fielded in
(post)conflict environments (Brück et al. 2010). Between these two extremes, there is enormous opportunity to use and combine multiple indirect techniques
to tackle sensitive issues of pressing theoretical and
practical importance.
That combatant violence has asymmetrical effects
on civilian attitudes also raises implications for existing theories of civil war violence. Most importantly,
this asymmetry underscores the need to consider the
psychological mechanisms that may drive civilian behavior in wartime. In part, this may result in the
broadening of our understanding of individual incentives to include nonmaterial and group-based incentives as well as material inducements and punishments.
Equally important, however, is the role played by perceptions of harm, as measured by self-reports. No single
event dataset, or even multiple ones, will capture the
complete array of violence experienced by a population during wartime, especially if these data remain

Vol. 107, No. 4

narrowly focused (as now) on civilian fatalities only.
Rather than relying solely on event data, we should
integrate perceptions of harm and other individuallevel characteristics into our models if we are to understand how violence is understood by civilians and
how it affects both attitudes and subsequent behavior.
Given that ISAF’s own event data had little explanatory weight in our models, village level or even coarser
data are likely inappropriate for testing theories that
assume individual- or group-level motives and mechanisms.
As a part of this process, empirical strategies will
need to move beyond the simplistic assumption that
violence has uniform effects. Statistical models that
rely on counts of violent acts but do not distinguish
among perpetrator and victim identities are likely to
be misspecified, for example. Instead, we should be
devising and testing theories that measure conditional
average treatment effects if we are to properly capture
the heterogeneous effects of violence on attitudes. This
move is especially important for explaining why certain
policies worked (or failed) and identifying why certain
individuals (but not others) were more responsive to
particular initiatives. Beyond violence, measurement of
the effectiveness of aid interventions would also likely
benefit from considering whether program effects are
conditional on donor identity.
Finally, we still know little about how group identities form under wartime conditions or how blame for
particular events is assigned by affected individuals.
Reversing this study’s focus to treat identity as the
dependent variable would provide insight into the dynamics of blame in wartime settings. Perhaps most ambitiously, future research should strive to close the loop
between attitudes and behavior. Estimates of support
could become the basis for predicting the location of
future violence or the degree of collaboration with the
local population, highlighting again the importance of
elevating civilian attitudes from their current neglected
status in our theories to the foreground of our study of
civil war dynamics.

APPENDIX
Endorsement Experiment Questions
In addition to the prison reform question, we used three other
questions in order to estimate support levels for the Taliban
and ISAF.

Direct Elections. It has recently been proposed [by the
Taliban; by foreign forces] to allow Afghans to vote in direct
elections when selecting leaders for district councils. Provided for
under Electoral Law, these direct elections would increase the
transparency of local government as well as its responsiveness
to the needs and priorities of the Afghan people. It would also
permit local people to actively participate in local administration
through voting and by advancing their own candidacy for office
in these district councils. How do you feel about this proposal?

Independent Election Commission. A recent proposal
calls [by the Taliban; by foreign forces] for the strengthening of the
Independent Election Commission (IEC). The Commission has a
number of important functions, including monitoring presidential

697

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan
and parliamentary elections for fraud and verifying the identity of
candidates for political office. Strengthening the IEC will increase
the expense of elections and may delay the announcement of
official winners but may also prevent corruption and election day
problems. How do you feel about this proposal?

Anti-Corruption Reform. It has recently been proposed
[by the Taliban; by foreign forces] that the new Office of Oversight for Anti-Corruption, which leads investigations into corruption among government and military officials, be strengthened.
Specifically, the Office’s staff should be increased and its ability
to investigate suspected corruption at the highest levels, including
among senior officials, should be improved by allowing the Office
to collect its own information about suspected wrong-doing. How
do you feel about this policy?

“Ground-Truthing” Our Initial Findings
Figure 1 displays the overall (top row) and provincial distributions of responses to the four endorsement questions. Three
patterns are worth noting. First, there is substantial heterogeneity of interprovince support for these policies, even independent of particular endorsements. This is encouraging since
it suggests that the questions, taken separately or together,
possess strong discriminatory power. Compare higher support for prison reform in Logar, for example, with Khost, or
anticorruption efforts in Logar with Helmand. Second, support differs substantially across Taliban and ISAF endorsements. In some provinces including the Taliban stronghold of
Helmand or the warlord-controlled Uruzgan, support for Taliban endorsed policies is far higher than ISAF endorsed policies. In fewer cases, notably in the key battleground province
of Kunar, ISAF endorsement translates into higher support
for at least two proposals. To further validate whether the
endorsement experiments are measuring the support for the
Taliban and ISAF, the Appendix presents a detailed descriptive analysis, which argues that the patterns we observe across
provinces and districts are consistent with conditions in each
province at the time of the survey.
Since endorsement experiments only provide indirect
measures of support, it is important to compare these responses with existing knowledge of these areas. We contend
that, while these distributions are broadly consistent with the
qualitative knowledge about these five provinces, our survey
experiment also identifies novel patterns at provincial and
district levels.
As Figure 1 demonstrates, Helmand reveals a strong proTaliban emphasis in its collective response to the endorsement questions at the provincial level. This finding is perhaps unsurprising, for Helmand has been a Taliban bastion since the resurgence of the Taliban movement in 2006.
Afghanistan’s largest province, a key south-north supply line,
and the center of its booming opium trade, Helmand has also
consistently topped ISAF charts for insurgent-initiated attacks against ISAF forces. In 2010—that is, before and during
our survey—ISAF and Afghan National Army (ANA) forces
had launched a series of operations designed to evict the
Taliban forcibly from several districts, including Garmser,
Nawa, Nad Ali, Now Zad, and the capital, Lashkar Gah.
These efforts have yielded a modest reduction of anti-ISAF
violence, but these gains remain fragile and their ultimate
effects unknown.
Khost is a relatively small and mountainous province
that, owing to its strategic location bordering Pakistan, has
emerged as an important transit route for both Taliban fighters and those of the Haqqani network. Closely aligned with
the Taliban, the Haqqani network is led by Mawlawi Jalaluddin Haqqani and his son, Sirajuddin Haqqani, and has gained

698

November 2013
a reputation as one of the most lethal and violent insurgent
organizations in Afghanistan. At the time of our survey,
Khost was largely stable, but had recorded a notable uptick
in attacks in 2010 when compared with the preceding year.
The presence of both a sizable ISAF contingent and these
armed groups lends Khost the air of a classic “battleground”
province. As a consequence, attitudes toward the combatants
appear nearly evenly divided, with ISAF or Taliban leanings
apparently dictated by the content of the particular issue
rather than prior allegiance.
Much like Khost, Kunar is a relatively small, mountainous
province that borders Pakistan. Two insurgent groups, the
Taliban and Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin (HIG), are present,
though the Taliban are by far the largest and most important
organization. Unlike Khost, however, Kunar has long been
viewed by ISAF as a linchpin in its eastern strategy. As such,
at least $70 million in aid has been poured into the province,
while the United States maintains a large, if still insufficient,
military presence in the province. Here, too, public attitudes
toward the combatants appears divided, with the weight of
a particular endorsement conditional on the question posed.
This is perhaps to be expected given the sizable presence
of both combatants in the province, not to mention everincreasing levels of violence between them. Kunar will only
gain in importance in the coming months as ISAF shifts its
counterinsurgency strategy away from Helmand and Kandahar and toward Afghanistan’s eastern border provinces.
Logar has until recently enjoyed a reputation for safety,
with some of the lowest recorded totals of insurgent violence
among Pashtun-majority provinces. While an important transit route to and from Kabul, there is only a minimal Czechled ISAF force presence in the province. In recent years,
however, the Taliban have made inroads into this agricultural province as part of their strategy to encircle Kabul,
and violent incidents increased in 2010. Our endorsement
experiments reflect this trend: three of four questions suggest
a pro-Taliban leaning, despite the fact that Logar’s capital,
Pul-i-Alam, is only 60 kilometers from Kabul.
Uruzgan is a rugged, sparsely populated and extremely
poor (even by Afghanistan’s standards) province that has
only a small Dutch-led ISAF presence. Local government
has essentially been captured by Matiullah Khan, a local
warlord who heads a private army that generates millions
of dollars by guarding NATO’s supply convoys that transit
the highway linking Kandahar to Uruzgan’s capital, Tirin
Kowt.37 Khan, along with U.S. and Australian Special Forces,
has also fought to clear Taliban forces from Uruzgan, though
allegations persist that he actually colludes with, rather than
combats, Taliban forces to secure additional revenues for
“protection.” In light of the province’s chaotic government,
weak ISAF presence, and general lawlessness, the demonstrated support for the Taliban in Figure 1 is perhaps unsurprising despite ISAF’s own internal designation of Uruzgan
as generally under “government or local control.”
Finally, Figure 8 offers Helmand as an example that substantial district-level variation exists in the distribution of
responses, even within a province uniformly regarded by
ISAF and outside observers as heavily pro-Taliban. Intriguingly, in the case of Lashkar Gah, Helmand’s capital district,
we even observe high levels of ISAF support. This trend is
likely due to a joint ISAF-Afghan National Army (ANA)
offensive launched in late 2010 that resulted in the forced
dislodging of Taliban fighters from the capital city, if not the
surrounding countryside. Unlike other provinces, however,

37 See “With U.S. Aid, Warlord Builds Afghan Empire,” New York
Times, 5 June 2010.

American Political Science Review

Within-District Distribution of Responses to the Endorsement Experiment for Helmand

(N = 225)
(N = 108)

Lashkar Gah

ISAF

Taliban
ISAF
Control
Taliban
(N = 225)

Musa Qala

Anti−Corruption
Reform

Control

ISAF
Control
Taliban

(N = 216)

Naw Zad

Independent Election
Commission

Prison Reform

Taliban

ISAF
Control
Taliban

(N = 81)

Garmser

Direct Elections

Washer

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 8.
Province

Vol. 107, No. 4

ISAF
Control
Strongly
agree

Agree

Indifferent

Disgree

Strongly
disagree

Don't Know

Refused

Notes: Plots show the distribution of five point scale responses to four policy questions (columns) across three groups (Taliban/ISAF
endorsement groups and control group) for each of the five districts of the Helmand Province in the sample. Sample sizes are also
shown.

Helmand has a fairly high refusal to answer rate, which is
mostly concentrated in Now Zad district. Subsequent interviews with our Helmand survey coordinator and district
managers suggest that the survey was conducted during an
ongoing ISAF military operation that had bloodied, but not
yet eliminated, the Taliban in Now Zad.38 Historically a Taliban bastion, Now Zad was a “no man’s land” in JanuaryFebruary 2011 and, as such, many respondents simply refused
to answer these questions to avoid incurring Taliban wrath.
Given these circumstances, it is nonetheless remarkable that
the majority of respondents in Now Zad still answered these
questions.

Sampling Balance Checks
The multistage random sampling of provinces within the universe of 13 Pashtun-dominated provinces, then districts, then
villages guarantees balance across covariates in expectation.
Figure 9 shows that the balance is also achieved between sur38 Interview with project supervisor, Kabul, 4 September 2011; Interview with Helmand project manager, Konduz City, 6 September
2011.

veyed villages (black density lines) and nonsampled villages
in sampled districts (dark gray density lines).

Exposure to Violence
The questions about exposure to violence are reproduced
below.
•
•

Over the past year, have you or anyone in your family
suffered harm due to the actions of foreign forces
[Taliban]?
Over the past year, have you heard of anyone in your
manteqa suffering harm due to the actions of foreign
forces [Taliban]?

The same questions were asked about the Taliban to establish
the comparison between the effects of ISAF and Talibaninflicted harm on attitudes. Manteqa literally translates as
“area” and typically refers to a geographic space larger than
the village but much smaller than a district. To avoid ambiguity and differing interpretations, the questions were preceded
by a script that defined “harm” as both physical injury and
property damage.

699

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

FIGURE 9.

November 2013

Covariate Balance Across Surveyed and Non-Surveyed Villages

Altitude (km)

Violent Events
Initiated by ISAF

Population Size (hundreds)

1.0

0.15

0.15

0.025

0.8

0.4

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.015
0.010

0.2

0.005

0.0

0.00
0

1

2

3

0.00
0

20

40

60

After each question about direct and indirect exposure to
harm, we asked whether the individual had personally experienced or heard about efforts by the responsible combatant to
mitigate the harm inflicted. These questions permit subsetting
of individual experiences by exposure to harm (yes/no), by
combatant, and whether those harmed were subsequently
approached by the responsible party in an effort to mitigate
the negative effects of their actions. This latter comparison
is especially important since it allows us to examine whether
attitudes are irretrievably hardened by violence or whether
they can be shaped, if only partially, by combatants after
the fact. Our postharm mitigation question is reproduced
below.

•

(If yes to the above question) Have you (or your
family) been approached by foreign forces after they
caused harm?
(If yes to the above question) Have you heard whether
foreign forces approached those who suffered harm?

As before, these questions were repeated to capture whether
the Taliban had approached victimized individuals (direct
exposure) and if the respondent knew of similar efforts in his
manteqa (indirect exposure).
Respondents were also asked “how often do you encounter foreign forces in the area where you live?” This
question, which was not asked about the Taliban for se-

700

Surveyed Village
Non Surveyed in
Sampled Districts

0.020

0.6

•

Violent Events
Initiated by the Taliban

0.000
0

20

40

60

0

200

400

600

800

curity reasons, aimed to control for prior level of interaction with ISAF forces. Possible answers ranged from “daily”
and “several times a week” to “several times a month” and
“never.”
Figure 10 presents mosaic plots summarizing four key
questions (two for each combatant) about exposure to violence: whether the respondent had experienced harm from
Taliban and ISAF-initiated violence and whether the responsible combatant subsequently approached harmed individuals. Plots were created for direct exposure to violence (Figure
10(a)) and indirect exposure in the manteqa (Figure 10(b))
for the sample average and for each province. In each mosaic
plot, the rectangle’s area is proportional to the number of
respondents who answered a specific combination of these
four questions. For example, the plot in the upper left corner illustrates the overall distribution for direct exposure to
violence; the largest rectangle depicts those that did not experience harm by either the Taliban or ISAF and who were,
as a consequence, not approached.
Province-level variation is broadly consistent with the pattern of violence outlined in Figure 3. Helmand is associated
with the highest recorded levels of violence from individual
and manteqa level self-reports (right corner plots of each
subfigure) and from the CIDNE data, for example. Logar, by
contrast, is associated with the lowest levels of self-reported
victimization (left bottom corner plot of Figure 10(a)) and
CIDNE data (see Figures 11 and 12).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

Responses to Questions About Taliban and ISAF Victimization and Subsequent “Approach” by These Combatants
Overall (N = 2754)
Taliban

Overall (N = 2754)
Helmand (N = 855)

Taliban
and
andched
ed
ed hed
ed
rm
rm roa t Harm
Ha proac
Ha t App
o
N
o
p
A
N

Harmed and
Approached

Helmand (N = 855)

and ed
and
ed
ed hed med roach
arm
r
rm
Ha proac Ha t App
ot H
N
o
p
A
N

Harmed and
Approached

0.03
0.04

0.05

0.02

0.06

0.08

Harmed and
Not Approached

0.05

0.24

0.16

0.05

0.2

Harmed and
Not Approached

0.07

0.1

0.33

0.14

0.08

0.45

ISAF

0.1

ISAF

0.03

Not Harmed

0.07

Not Harmed

0.5

0.11

0.05

0.26
0.19

0.29

Khost (N = 630)
Khost (N = 630)
0.01

American Political Science Review

FIGURE 10.

Kunar (N = 396)

Kunar (N = 396)

0.02

0.02

0.08

0.02
0.03

0.04

0.08

0.09

0.05

0.07

0.15

0.13

0.1
0.05

0.07

0.17
0.18

0.21
0.09

0.16

0.15

0.65
0.09

0.47

0.08

0.3
0.06

Logar (N = 486)

Logar (N = 486)

Urozgan (N = 387)

0

●

0.17

Urozgan (N = 387)
0 01

●

0.07

0.11

0.13

0.16

0.06

0.2

0.15

0.48
0.1

0.24

0.79

0.13

Direct Experience with Violence

0.34

0.37

(b)

0.07

0.31

Heard About Violence in the manteqa (area)

Notes: Mosaic plots depict the overall and interprovince distributions of responses at the self/family (left two columns) and manteqa (right two columns) levels. In each plot, the area of a
rectangle is proportional to the number of respondents who answered those four questions in a specific way. The number in each rectangle represents the proportion of the same of the
corresponding subgroup. “Don’t Know” and “Refuse to Answer” were dropped as they accounted for at most 2% of the sample.

701

Vol. 107, No. 4

(a)

0.06

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

November 2013

Victimization
by ISAF
by Taliban

1.0
0.5

Change in Support
for Taliban

Change in Support
for ISAF

Victimization
by ISAF
by Taliban

●

0.0
−0.5

●

−1.0

●

1.0
0.5

●

●

0.0
−0.5
−1.0

Pro−Taliban Pashtun

Difference in Change in
Support (Taliban − ISAF)

FIGURE 11. Differences in Estimated Effects of Victimization by the Taliban and ISAF on Their
Support Levels by Tribal Affiliation with the Taliban
Victimization
by ISAF
by Taliban
1.0
●

0.5

●

0.0
−0.5
−1.0

Non−Pro−Taliban Pashtun

Notes: The right panel presents the differences between the results in the middle and left panels. Posterior means of the corresponding
coefficients are plotted along with 95% confidence intervals.

Alternative Explanations
FIGURE 12. Relationship between District-Level Covariates and Estimated District-Level Support
for the Taliban and ISAF

Support for Taliban

1.0

CERP Spending

CDC Projects

Territorial Control

Opium Production

Sharia Courts

Borders Pakistan

0.5
0.0
●

−0.5

Difference
High − Low

●

●

Difference
Taliban−
Contested

Difference
Many − Few

●

High

Low

0−2

3−6

Contested

●

●
Difference
High − Low

Taliban

−1.0

High

Low

Difference
Yes − No
Yes

No

Difference
Yes − No
Yes

No

Support for ISAF

1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5

●

●

●

●

●

●

−1.0

1.0

Difference in Support
Taliban − ISAF

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

Tribal Analysis

0.5
●

0.0

●

●

●

●

●

−0.5
−1.0

Notes: The estimated mean support levels and 95% confidence intervals for each combatant (solid circles and squares) are presented
along with net differences (open triangles).

702

American Political Science Review

Vol. 107, No. 4

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

Coefficient Estimates of the Full Models
TABLE 3. Posterior Means and Standard Deviations for Estimated
Effects of Covariates on Support for ISAF, the Taliban, and the
Estimated Difference from the Full Individual-level Harm Model and the
Manteqa Harm Model

Support for the Taliban
Individual level
Harm from Taliban violence
Harm from Taliban violence is NA
Harm from ISAF violence
Harm from ISAF violence is NA
Approach by Taliban after Harm
Approach by Taliban after Harm is NA
Approach by ISAF after Harm
Approach by ISAF after Harm is NA
ISAF encounter frequency
Years of education
Age (tens)
Income (Afghanis)
Income is NA
Schooled in madrassa
Pro-Taliban tribe
Pro-Taliban tribe is NA
Village-level
Altitude (km)
Population
ISAF-initiated violent events (within 5 km)
Taliban-initiated violent events (within 5 km)
District level
Sha’ria courts
CERP project spending
Opium cultivation (ha.)
CDC project count
Road length (km)
Pakistan border
Government territorial control
Contested territorial control
Support for ISAF
Individual level
Harm from Taliban violence
Harm from Taliban violence is NA
Harm from ISAF violence
Harm from ISAF violence is NA
Approach by Taliban after Harm
Approach by Taliban after Harm is NA
Approach by ISAF after Harm
Approach by ISAF after Harm is NA
ISAF encounter frequency
Years of education
Age (tens)
Income (Afghanis)
Income is NA
Schooled in madrassa
Pro-Taliban tribe
Pro-Taliban tribe is NA
Village-level
Altitude (km)
Population
ISAF-initiated violent events (within 5km)
Taliban-initiated violent events (within 5km)
District-level
Sha’ria courts
CERP project spending
Opium cultivation (ha.)
CDC project count
Road length (km)
Pakistan border
Government territorial control
Contested territorial control

Individual Harm

Manteqa Harm

est

se

est

se

−0.12
0.41
0.56
0.08
−0.12
0.55
−0.84
−0.04
−0.14
−0.04
−0.04
0.26
0.65
0.14
0.27
−0.28

0.15
0.40
0.11
0.47
0.19
0.57
0.22
0.78
0.06
0.01
0.03
0.06
0.24
0.11
0.15
0.24

−0.33
0.01
0.38
0.23
0.33
0.29
−0.40
−0.50
−0.13
−0.03
−0.02
0.20
0.63
0.10
0.20
−0.35

0.16
0.51
0.08
0.38
0.17
0.26
0.17
0.22
0.05
0.01
0.03
0.06
0.23
0.11
0.14
0.32

0.03
−0.06
−0.05
0.02

0.11
0.06
0.07
0.05

0.10
−0.04
−0.03
0.05

0.14
0.05
0.06
0.07

0.09
0.12
0.32
−0.08
−0.02
0.14
−0.09
−0.18

0.53
0.24
0.29
0.10
0.14
0.35
0.55
0.31

0.09
0.13
0.30
−0.08
−0.06
−0.09
−0.10
−0.24

0.50
0.26
0.26
0.10
0.18
0.38
0.51
0.28

0.19
−0.34
−0.27
0.37
−0.63
0.33
0.16
0.66
0.05
0.01
−0.06
0.14
0.22
−0.29
−0.10
0.21

0.15
0.35
0.12
0.48
0.19
0.65
0.23
0.76
0.06
0.01
0.04
0.08
0.29
0.10
0.15
0.28

0.04
−0.06
−0.17
0.14
−0.37
0.24
0.09
0.21
0.04
0.02
−0.03
0.10
0.16
−0.25
−0.05
0.20

0.15
0.46
0.12
0.40
0.20
0.32
0.18
0.28
0.06
0.01
0.04
0.07
0.28
0.11
0.15
0.30

−0.09
0.05
−0.00
−0.05

0.10
0.07
0.07
0.08

−0.07
0.07
−0.02
−0.03

0.12
0.07
0.09
0.08

−0.17
0.12
0.10
−0.12
0.16
0.19
0.31
−0.35

0.51
0.25
0.27
0.10
0.17
0.33
0.47
0.29

−0.30
0.13
0.10
−0.11
0.08
−0.01
0.12
−0.32

0.51
0.25
0.26
0.10
0.15
0.40
0.52
0.25

703

A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

REFERENCES
Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen. 1994. Gang Behavior, Law Enforcement, and Community Values. In Values and Public Policy,
eds. Henry Aaron, Thomas Mann, and Taylor Timothy. Washington, DC: Brookings, 173–204.
Allport, Gordon. 1954. The Nature of Prejudice. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Barabas, Jason, and Jennifer Jerit. 2010. “Are Survey Experiments
Externally Valid?” American Political Science Review 104 (2): 226–
42.
Barfield, Thomas. 2010. Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov. 2011. “Winning Hearts and Minds? Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Afghanistan.” MIT Political Science Working Paper No. 201114.
Berinsky, Adam. 2004. Silent Voices: Opinion Polls and Political
Representation in America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Berman, Eli, Jacob Shapiro, and Joseph Felter. 2011. “Can Hearts
and Minds Be Bought? The Economics of Counterinsurgency in
Iraq.” Journal of Political Economy 119: 766–819.
Berrebi, Claude. 2007. “Evidence About the Link Between Education, Poverty and Terrorism Among Palestinians.” Peace Science
and Public Policy 13: 1–36.
Blair, Graeme, Christine Fair, Neil Malhotra and Jacob Shapiro.
2013. “Poverty and Support for Militant Politics: Evidence from
Pakistan.” American Journal of Political Science 57 (1): 30–48.
Brewer, Marilyn. 1999. “The Psychology of Prejudice: Ingroup Love
or Outgroup Hate?” Journal of Social Issues 55: 429–444.
Brück, Tilman, Patricia Justino, Philip Verwimp, and Alexandra
Avdeenko. 2010. “Identifying Conflict and Violence in MicroLevel Surveys.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 5067.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan. 2005. “The Quality of Terror.” American
Journal of Political Science 49: 515–30.
Bullock, Will, Kosuke Imai, and Jacob N. Shapiro. 2011. “Statistical
Analysis of Endorsement Experiments: Measuring Support for
Militant Groups in Pakistan.” Political Analysis 19 (4): 363–84.
Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict. 2010a. Addressing Civilian Harm in Afghanistan: Policies and Practices of International
Forces. New York: CIVIC.
Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict. 2010b. United States Military Compensation to Civilians in Armed Conflict. New York:
CIVIC.
Chandra, Kanchan, and Steven Wilkinson. 2008. “Measuring the
Effect of ‘Ethnicity’.” Comparative Political Studies 41: 515–63.
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler. 2004. “Greed and Grievance in
Civil War.” Oxford Economic Papers 56: 563–95.
Condra, Luke, and Jacob Shapiro. 2012. “Who Takes the Blame?
The Strategic Effects of Collateral Damage.” American Journal of
Political Science 56 (1): 167–87.
Condra, Luke, Jospeh Felter, Radha Iyengar, and Jacob Shapiro.
2011. “The Effects of Civilian Casualties in Afghanistan and Iraq.”
NBER Working Paper 16152.
Cook, S.W. 1971. The Effect of Unintended Interracial Contact Upon
Racial Interaction and Attitude Change. Washington, DC: U.S. De−
partment of Health, Education, and Welfare. Project No. 5D1320,
Final Report.
Crews, Robert, and Amin Tarzi. 2008. The Taliban and the Crisis of
Afghanistan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Crost, Benjamin, and Patrick Johnston. 2010. “Aid Under Fire:
Development Projects and Civil Conflict.” ISP Discussion Paper
2010-18.
DeMaio, T. J. 1984. Social Desirability and Survey Measurement: A
Review. In Surveying Subjective Phenomena, eds. Charles F. Turner
and Elizabeth Martin. Vol. 2. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
257–81.
Esses, Victoria, John Dovidio, Lynne Jackson, and Tamara Armstrong. 2001. “The Immigration Dilemma: The Role of Perceived
Group Competition, Ethnic Prejudice, and National Identity.”
Journal of Social Issues 57: 389–412.
Fearon, James, and David Laitin. 2003. “Ethnicity, Insurgency,
and Civil War.” American Political Science Review 97(1): 75–
90.

704

November 2013
Giustozzi, Antonio. 2008. Koran, Kalashnikov, and Laptop: The NeoTaliban Insurgency in Afghanistan. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hale, Henry. 2008. The Foundations of Ethnic Politics: Separatism of
States and Nations in Eurasia and the World. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hewstone, Miles, Mark Rubin, and Hazel Willis. 2002. “Intergroup
Bias.” Annual Review of Psychology 53: 575–604.
Human Rights First. 2011. Detained and Denied in Afghanistan: How
to Make U.S. Detention Comply with the Law. New York: Human
Rights First.
International Crisis Group. 2008. Taliban Propaganda: Winning the
War of Words? New York: International Crisis Group.
Johnson, Thomas, and M. Chris Mason. 2008. “No Sign until the
Burst of Fire: Understanding the Pakistan-Afghanistan Frontier.”
International Security 32: 41–77.
Jones, Seth. 2009. In the Graveyard of Empires: America’s War in
Afghanistan. New York: W.W. Norton.
Kalyvas, Stathis. 2006. The Logic of Violence in Civil War. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kalyvas, Stathis, and Matthew Kocher. 2007. “How “Free” is FreeRiding in Civil War? Violence, Insurgency, and the Collective Action Problem.” World Politics 59 (2): 177–216.
Kilcullen, David. 2009. The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small Wars
in the Midst of a Big One. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kocher, Matthew, Thomas Pepinsky, and Stathis Kalyvas. 2011.
“Aerial Bombing and Counterinsurgency in the Vietnam War.”
American Journal of Political Science 55: 201–18.
Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, Royal United Services Institute, and
Transparency International UK. 2011. Afghanistan in Transition:
Governance, Counter-Corruption and Development: Reshaping
Priorities for 2015 and Beyond. London, UK: RUSI.
Krueger, Alan, and Jitka Maleckova. 2003. “Education, Poverty, and
Terrorism: Is There a Causal Connection?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17: 119–44.
Leites, Nathan, and Charles Wolf. 1970. Rebellion and Authority: An
Analytic Essay on Insurgent Conflicts. Chicago: Markham Publishing Company.
Lord, Charles, Lee Ross, and Mark Lepper. 1979. “Biased Assimilation and Attitude Polarization: The Effects of Prior Theories on
Subsequently Considered Evidence.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 37: 2098–109.
Lyall, Jason. 2010. “Are Co-Ethnics More Effective Counterinsurgents? Evidence from the Second Chechen War.” American Political Science Review 104: 1–20.
Mampilly, Zachariah. 2011. Rebel Rulers: Insurgent Governance and
Civilian Life During War. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Mao, Tse-tung. 1961. On Guerrilla Warfare. Chicago: Praeger.
Nixon, Hamish. 2011. Achieving Durable Peace: Afghan Perspectives
on a Peace Process. Oslo and New York: PRIO and USIP.
Office of the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction. 2009. Afghanistan’s High Office of Oversight Needs Significantly Strengthened Authority, Independence, and Donor Support
to Become an Effective Anti-Corruption Institution. Washington,
DC: Government Accountability Office.
Paluck, Elizabeth, and Donald Green. 2009. “Prejudice Reduction:
What Works? A Critical Look at Evidence from the Field and the
Laboratory.” Annual Review of Psychology 60: 339–67.
Petersen, Roger. 2001. Resistance and Rebellion: Lessons of Eastern
Europe. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Petersen, Roger. 2002. Understanding Ethnic Violence: Fear, Hatred,
and Resentment in Twentieth-Century Eastern Europe. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Plummer, Martyn. 2009. “JAGS: Just Another Gibbs Sampler.”
https://sourceforge.net/projects/mcmc-jags.
Popkin, Samuel. 1979. The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy
of Rural Society in Vietnam. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Stoll, David. 1993. Between Two Armies in the Ixil Towns of
Guatemala. New York: Columbia University Press.
Tajfel, H., and J.C. Turner. 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup
Conflict. In The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, eds. W.
G. Austin, and S. Worchel. Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole, 33–47.
Tajfel, Henri. 1970. “Experiments in Intergroup Discrimination.”
Scientific American 223: 96–102.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Harvard University, on 01 Mar 2019 at 23:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000403

American Political Science Review
Tajfel, Henri, ed. 2010. Social Identity and Intergroup Relations. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
The Asia Foundation. 2010. Afghanistan in 2010: A
Survey of the Afghan People. New York: The Asia
Foundation.
Thompson, Robert. 1966. Defeating Communist Insurgency. London:
Chatto & Windus.
Tomsen, Peter. 2011. The Wars of Afghanistan: Messianic Terrorism,
Tribal Conflicts, and the Failures of the Great Powers. New York:
PublicAffairs.
Trinquier, Roger. 2006. Modern Warfare: A French View of Counterinsurgency. New York: Praeger.

Vol. 107, No. 4
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. 2011. Civilian Casualty Data (2008-2010) as of 24 February 2011. Kabul,
Afghanistan: UNAMA.
United Nations Office of Drug Control. 2010. Afghanistan Opium
Survey: 2010. New York: UNODC.
United States Agency for International Development. 2011a. ACAP
Final Evaluation. Washington, DC: USAID.
United States Agency for International Development. 2011b. Development Assistance and Counter-Extremism: A Guide to Programming. Washington, DC: USAID.
U.S. Army. 2007. U.S. Army Field Manual No. 3-24. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

705

