The Review of Economic Studies, Ltd.

Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem
Author(s): Charles F. Manski
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, No. 3 (Jul., 1993), pp. 531-542
Published by: Oxford University Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2298123 .
Accessed: 13/01/2013 09:56
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

Oxford University Press and The Review of Economic Studies, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to The Review of Economic Studies.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Review of Economic Studies (1993) 60, 531-542
1993 The Review of Economic Studies Limited

0034-6527/93/00270531$02.00

?

Identification of
Social

The

Endogenous

Effects:

Reflection

Problem

CHARLES F. MANSKI
University of Wisconsin-Madison
First version received December 1991; final version accepted December 1992 (Eds.)
This paper examines the reflection problem that arises when a researcher observing the
distribution of behaviour in a population tries to infer whether the average behaviour in some
group influences the behaviour of the individuals that comprise the group. It is found that
inference is not possible unless the researcher has prior information specifying the composition
of reference groups. If this information is available, the prospects for inference depend critically
on the population relationship between the variables defining reference groups and those directly
affecting outcomes. Inference is difficult to impossible if these variables are functionally dependent
or are statistically independent. The prospects are better if the variables defining reference groups
and those directly affecting outcomes are moderately related in the population.

1. INTRODUCTION
A variety of terms in common use connote endogenous social effects, wherein the
propensity of an individual to behave in some way varies with the prevalence of that
behaviour in some reference group containing the individual. These effects may, depending on the context, be called "social norms", "peer influences", "neighbourhood effects",
"conformity", "imitation", "contagion", "epidemics", "bandwagons", "herd behaviour",
"social interactions", or "interdependent preferences".
Endogenous effects have long been central to sociology and social psychology; see,
for example, Asch (1952), Merton (1957), Erbring and Young (1979), and Bandura (1986).
Mainstream economics has always been fundamentally concerned with a particular
endogenous effect: how an individual's demand for a product varies with price, which
is partly determined by aggregate demand in the relevant market. Economists have also
studied other types of endogenous effects. Models of oligopoly posit reaction functions,
wherein the output chosen by each firm is a function of aggregate industry output.
Schelling (1971) analyzed the residential patterns that emerge when individuals choose
not to live in neighbourhoods where the percentage of residents of their own race is
below some threshold. Conlisk (1980) showed that, if decision making is costly, it may
be optimal for individuals to imitate the behaviour of other persons who are better
informed. Akerlof (1980), Jones (1984), and Bernheim (1991) studied the equilibria of
non-cooperative games in which individuals are punished for deviation from group norms.
Gaertner (1974), Pollak (1976), Alessie and Kapteyn (1991), and Case (1991) analyzed
consumer demand models in which, holding price fixed, individual demand increases
with the mean demand of a reference group.
While the price-mediated effect of aggregate demand on individual demand is quite
generally accepted, other endogenous effects are controversial. Many economists regard
531

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

532

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES

such central sociological concepts as norms and peer influences to be spurious phenomena
explainable by processes operating entirely at the level of the individual. (See, for example,
the Friedman (1957) criticism of Duesenberry (1949).) Even among sociologists, one still
does not find consensus on the nature of social effects. For example, there has been a
long-running debate about the existence and nature of neighbourhood effects. (See, for
example, Jencks and Mayer (1989).)
Why do such different perspectives persist? Why do the social sciences seem unable
to converge to common conclusions about the channels through which society affects the
individual? I believe that a large part of the answer is the difficulty of the identification
problem. Empirical analysis of behaviour often cannot distinguish among competing
hypotheses about the nature of social effects.
Economists have long been concerned with the identification of endogenous effects
channelled through markets, especially with the conditions under which observations of
equilibrium prices and quantities reveal the demand behaviour of consumers and the
supply behaviour of firms. But the identification of other endogenous effects has remained
relatively unexamined and poorly understood.
This paper examines the "reflection" problem that arises when a researcher observing
the distribution of behaviour in a population tries to infer whether the average behaviour
in some group influences the behaviour of the individuals that comprise the group. The
term reflection is appropriate because the problem is similar to that of interpreting the
almost simultaneous movements of a person and his reflection in a mirror. Does the
mirror image cause the person's movements or reflect them? An observer who does not
understand something of optics and human behaviour would not be able to tell.
Although the reflection problem has several aspects, the series of simple findings
reported in this paper collectively develop a theme: Inference on endogenous effects is
not possible unless the researcher has prior information specifying the composition of
reference groups. If this information is available, the prospects for inference depend
critically on the population relationship between the variables defining reference groups
and those directly affecting outcomes. Inference is difficult to impossible if these variables
are functionally dependent or statistically independent. The prospects are better if the
variables defining reference groups and those directly affecting outcomes are "moderately"
related in the population.
Section 2 examines the reflection problem in the context of a linear model applied
in many empirical studies of social effects. Section 3 analyzes non-linear models. Section
4 discusses dynamic models. Section 5 relates conventional consumer demand analysis
to the work of this paper. Section 6 concludes by stressing the need for richer data if
the analysis of social effects is to make more progress.
2. A LINEAR MODEL
The linear model analyzed here gives formal expression to three hypotheses often advanced
to explain the common observation that individuals belonging to the same group tend to
behave similarly. These hypotheses are:
(a) endogenous effects, wherein the propensity of an individual to behave in some
way varies with the behaviour of the group;
(b) exogenous (contextual) effects, wherein the propensity of an individual to behave
in snme wav varies with the exngennns characteristics of the aroun1 and
1. In the sociological literature, this is referred to as a "contextual effect". Inference on contextual effects
became an important concern of sociologists in the 1960s, when substantial efforts were made to learn the
effects on youth of school and neighbourhood environment (e.g. Coleman et al. (1966); Sewell and Armer
(1966)). The recent resurgence of interest in spatial concepts of the underclass has spawned many new empirical
studies (e.g. Crane (1991), Jencks and Mayer (1989), and Mayer (1991)). I use the term "exogenous" effect as
a synonym for contextual effect, to distinguish the idea from endogenous effects.

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

MANSKI

THE REFLECTION PROBLEM

533

(c) correlatedeffects, wherein individuals in the same group tend to behave similarly
because they have similar individual characteristics or face similar institutional
environments.
An example may help to clarify the distinction. Consider the high school achievement
of a teenage youth. There is an endogenous effect if, all else equal, individual achievement
tends to vary with the average achievement of the students in the youth's school, ethnic
group, or other reference group. There is an exogenous effect if achievement tends to
vary with, say, the socio-economic composition of the reference group. There are correlated
effects if youths in the same school tend to achieve similarly because they have similar
family backgrounds or because they are taught by the same teachers.
The three hypotheses have differing policy implications. Consider, for example, an
educational intervention providing tutoring to some of the students in a school but not
to the others. If individual achievement increases with the average achievement of the
students in the school, then an effective tutoring programme not only directly helps the
tutored students but, as their achievement rises, indirectly helps all students in the school,
with a feedback to further achievement gains by the tutored students. Exogenous effects
and correlated effects do not generate this "social multiplier".
Section 2.1 specifies the model. Sections 2.2 and 2.3 analyse the identification
problem, first considering the general model and then a restricted version assuming that
neither exogenous nor correlated effects are present. Section 2.4 shows that, although
the linear model sometimes imposes restrictions on observed behaviour, the model holds
tautologically if the attributes defining reference groups and those directly affecting
outcomes are functionally dependent. Section 2.5 draws implications for the problem of
identifying reference groups. Section 2.6 discusses sample inference.
2.1. Model specification
Let each member of a population be characterized by a value for (y, x, z, u) E R x RJ x
RK x R1. Here y is a scalar outcome (e.g. a youth's achievement in high school), x are
attributes characterizing an individual's reference group (e.g. a youth's school or ethnic
group), and (z, u) are attributes that directly affect y (e.g. socioeconomic status and
ability). A researcher observes a random sample of realizations of (y, x, z). Realizations
of u are not observed.
Assume that
y=a+/3E(yjx)+E(zjx)'y+z'rq+u,

E(ujx,z)==x'8,

(1)

where (a, 3, y, 8, q) is a parameter vector. It follows that the mean regression of y on
(x, z) has the linear form

E(y Ix, z) = a +/3E(y Ix) + E(z Ix)'y +x'8 + z'mq.

(2)

If 38$ 0, the linear regression (2) expresses an endogenous effect: a person's outcome y
varies with E (y Ix), the mean of y among those persons in the reference group defined
by x.2 If y $ 0, the model expresses an exogenous effect: y varies with E(z Ix), the mean
of the exogenous variables z among those persons in the reference group. If 8 $ 0, the
model expresses correlated effects: persons in reference group x tend to behave similarly
2. Beginning with Hyman (1942), sociological reference-group theory has sought to express the idea that
individuals learn from or are otherwise influenced by the behaviour and attitudes of some reference group.
Bank, Slavings, and Biddle (1990) give an historical account. Sociological writing has remained predominately
verbal, but economists have interpreted reference groups as conditioning variables, in the manner of (2). See
Alessie and Kapteyn (1991) or Manski (1993a).

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

534

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES

because they have similar unobserved individual characteristics u or face similar institutional environments. The parameter q expresses the direct effect of z on y.3
2.2. Identification of the parameters
The question is whether the two types of social effects can be distinguished from one
another and from the non-social effects. Thus, we are interested in identification of the
parameter vector (a, 3, y, 8, q). To focus attention on this question, I shall assume that
either (i) (x, z) has discrete support or (ii) y and z have finite variances and the regressions
[E(y Ix, z), E(y Ix), E(z Ix)] are continuous on the support of (x, z). Either assumption
implies that [E (y Ix, z), E (y Ix), E (z Ix)] are consistently estimable on the support of
(x, z).4 So we can treat these regressions as known and focus on the parameters.
The reflection problem arises out of the presence of E(y Ix) as a regressor in (2).
Integrating both sides of (2) with respect to z reveals that E (y Ix) solves the "social
equilibrium" equation
E(y Ix) = a +/3E(y|x)+ E(zjx)'y+x'8+E(zjx)'rq.
(3)
Provided that /8 $ 1, equation (3) has a unique solution, namely
E(y Ix) = a/(1 -/3) + E(z Ix)'(y+ rl)/(1 -/3) + x'8/(1 -/3).
(4)
Thus, E(y Ix) is a linear function of [1, E(z Ix), x], where "1" denotes the constant. It
follows that the parameters (a, 3, y, 8) are all unidentified. Endogenous effects cannot
be disti1iguished from exogenous effects or from correlated effects.
What is identified? Inserting (4) into (2) we obtain the reduced form model
E(y Ix, z) = aC/(1-,8) + E(z x)'[(y +,3B)/(1 -,)] + x'8/(1 -) + z'7.
(5)
Inspection of (5) provides our first result:
Proposition 1. In the linear model (2) with /3$ 1, the compositeparameters a/(1-,8),
(y +,877)/(1 -/,), 8/(1 - 3), and q are identified if the regressors [1, E(z l x), x, z] are
linearly independent in the population.'
Identification of the composite parameters does not enable one to distinguish between
the two social effects but does permit one to determine whether some social effect is
present. If (y +,Bjq)/(1 -,/) is non-zero, then either /3q or y must be non-zero.
3. Many generalizations of model (2) are of potential interest. Non-linear and dynamic models will be
examined in Sections 3 and 4. Some other directions for generalization include the following:
(i) Each person might be influenced by multiple reference groups, giving more weight to the behaviour
of some groups than to others.
(ii) The outcome y might be a vector, yielding a system of endogenous effects with mean reference-group
outcomes along each dimension affecting individual outcomes along other dimensions.
(iii) Social effects might be transmitted by distributional features other than the mean. For example, it
is sometimes said that the strength of the effect of social norms on individual behaviour depends
on the dispersion of behaviour in the reference group; the smaller the dispersion, the stronger the norm.
4. Cell-average estimates may be used if the support of (x, z) is discrete. A variety of non-parametric
regression estimates may be used if assumption (ii) holds; see, for example, Hardle (1990). Assumptions (i)
and (ii) cover many but not all cases of empirical interest. They do not seem appropriate in studies of small-group
social interactions, such as family interactions. In analyses of family interactions, each reference group (i.e.
family) has negligible size relative to the population and random sampling of individuals typically does not
yield multiple members of the same family. Hence, it is not a good empirical approximation to assume that
(x, z) has discrete support. Moreover, unless one can somehow characterize different families as being similar
in composition, one cannot assume that [E(y Ix, z), E(y Ix), E(z Ix)] are continuous. Random sampling of
individuals is not an effective data-gathering process for the study of family interactions. It is preferable to
use families as the sampling unit.
5. Linear independence in the population means that the support of the distribution of [1, E(z Ix), x, z]
is not a proper linear subspace of R' x RK x RJ x RK.

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

MANSKI

THE REFLECTION PROBLEM

535

The ability to detect some social effect breaks down if E(z|x) is a linear function
of [1, x, z]. Unfortunately, E(z Ix) is a linear function of [1, x, z] in various situations,
including those stated in the following corollary to Proposition 1.
Corollary. In the linear model (2) with 83$ 1, the composite social-effects parameter
(,y + /3)/ (1 - /) is not identifiedif any of these conditions hold, almost everywhere.

(a) z is a functionof x.
(b) E(zlx) does not vary withx.
(c) E (z x) is a linear function of x.
The corollary shows that the ability to infer the presence of social effects depends critically
on the manner in which z varies with x. In the context of the linear model (2), inference
is possible only if E(z Ix) varies non-linearly with x and Var (z Ix)> 0.
2.3. A pure endogenous-effects model
The outlook for identification improves if one has information on some parameter values.
Empirical studies of endogenous effects typically assume that y = 8 =0; so neither
exogenous nor correlated effects are present. In this case, (5) reduces to

E(y Ix, z) = a/(1-,1) + E(zI x)'[fr,qI(1-/3)] + z'r.

(6)

Inspection of (6) shows the following:
Proposition 2. In the linear model (2) withparameter restrictionsy = 8 = 0 and /8 $ 1,
the composite parameters a/(1 -/3), /37B/(1-/3), and q are identified if the regressors
[1, E(z Ix), z] are linearly independent in the population.
The endogenous-effects parameter /3 is not identified if 0r=0 or if E(z Ix) is a linear
function of [1, z]. In particular, /8 is not identified if any of these conditions hold, almost
everywhere:
(a) z is a function of x.

(b) E(z x) does not vary withx.
(d) E(z x) is a linear function of x. x is a linear function of z.
For example, in a study of school achievement, /8 is identified if x is family income,
z is ability, average ability E(z Ix) varies non-linearly with income, and achievement
varies with ability (i.e. q $ 0). But ,3 is not identified if x is (ability, family income) and
z is ability (condition a); if x is family income, z is ability, and average ability does not
vary with income (condition b); or if x is family income, z is (ability, family income),
and average ability varies linearly with income (condition d).
2.4. Tautological models
Even when its parameters are unidentified, a social-effects model may impose restrictions
on observed behaviour and so have testable implications. There are, however,
specifications of (x, z) that make a model hold tautologically. In particular, this is the
case when x and z are functionally dependent.
Specify z to be a function of x, say z = z(x). Then E[y Ix, z(x)]= E(y Ix). So the
linear model (2) holds with 8 = 1 and a = y = 8 = 77= 0. Thus, observed behaviour is

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

536

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES

always consistent with the hypothesis that individual behaviour reflects mean referencegroup behaviour. For example, if a researcher studying student achievement specifies x
to be (ability, family income) and z to be (ability), he will find that the data are consistent
with the hypothesis that reference groups are defined by (ability, family income), that
individual achievement reflects reference-group achievement, and that ability has no direct
effect on achievement.
Conversely, specify x to be a function of z, say x = x(z). Then E [y Ix(z), z] = E (y Iz).
So the semi-linear model
E(y l x, z) = a +/3E(y Ix) + E(z Ix)'y + x'8 + g(z)
(2')
holds with a = /8 = y = 8 = 0 and g(z) = E(y Iz); the only testable restriction of the linear
model (2) is its assumption that g(') is a linear function. Continuing the school achievement example, a researcher who specifies x to be (family income) and z to be (ability,
family income) will find that the data are consistent with the hypothesis that social forces
do not affect achievement.
2.5. Identifying reference groups
So far, I have presumed that researchers know how individuals form reference groups
and that individuals correctly perceive the mean outcomes experienced by their supposed
reference groups. There is substantial reason to question these assumptions. Researchers
studying social effects rarely offer empirical evidence to support their reference-group
specifications. The prevailing practice is simply to assume that individuals are influenced
by E (y|Ix) and E (z Ix), for some specified x.6 One of the few studies that does attempt
to justify its specification of reference groups is Woittiez and Kapteyn (1991). They use
individuals' responses to questions about their "social environments" as evidence on their
reference groups.
If researchers do not know how individuals form reference groups and perceive
reference-group outcomes, then it is reasonable to ask whether observed behavior can be
used to infer these unknowns. The findings reported in Section 2.4 imply that this is not
possible. Any specification of a functionally dependent pair (x, z) is consistent with
observed behaviour. The conclusion to be drawn is that informed specification of reference
groups is a necessary prelude to analysis of social effects.
2.6. Sample inference
Although our primary concern is with identification, a discussion of sample inference is
warranted.
Empirical studies of social effects have generally assumed that there are no correlated
effects and only one of the two types of social effects. Studies of exogenous effects have
typically applied a two-stage method to estimate (y, q). In the first stage, one uses the
sample data on (z, x) to estimate E (z Ix) non-parametrically; typically x is discrete and
the estimate of E(z Ix) is a cell-average. In the second stage, one estimates (y, q) by
finding the least squares fit of y to [1, EN(Z Ix), z], where EN(Z X) is the first-stage
estimate of E(zlx). See, for example, Coleman et al. (1966), Sewell and Armer (1966),
Hauser (1970), Crane (1991) or Mayer (1991).
6. The same practice is found in empirical studies of decision making under uncertainty. Researchers
assume they know how individuals form their expectations but offer no evidence justifying their assumptions.
I have recently criticized this practice in the context of studies of schooling choice. See Manski (1993b).

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

MANSKI

THE REFLECTION PROBLEM

537

Studies of endogenous effects have also applied a two-stage method to estimate
(,3, 77), but in the guise of a "spatial correlation" model
Yi=J8WiNY+Zi'7

+Ui,

i=l,-

(7)

,N.

, N) is the N x 1 vector of sample realizations of y and WiN is a
Here Y = (yi, i = 1,
specified 1 x N weighting vector; the components of WiN are non-negative and sum to
one. The disturbances u are usually assumed to be normally distributed, independent of
x, and the model is estimated by maximum likelihood. See, for example, Cliff and Ord
(1981), Doreian (1981), or Case (1991).
Equation (7) states that the behaviour of each person in the sample varies with a
weighted average of the behaviours of the other sample members. Thus, the spatial
correlation model assumes that an endogenous effect is present within the researcher's
sample rather than within the population from which the sample was drawn. This makes
sense in studies of small-group interactions, where the sample is composed of clusters
of friends, co-workers, or household members; see, for example, Duncan, Haller, and
Portes (1968) or Erbring and Young (1979). But it does not make sense in studies of
neighbourhood and other large-group social effects, where the sample members are
randomly chosen individuals. Taken at face value, equation (7) implies that the sample
members know who each other are and choose their outcomes only after having been
selected into the sample.
The spatial correlation model does make sense in studies of large-group interactions
if interpreted as a two-stage method for estimating a pure endogenous-effects model. In
the first stage, one uses the sample data on (y, x) to estimate E(y Ix) non-parametrically,
and in the second stage, one estimates (,3, 77) by finding the least-squares fit of y to
[1, EN(Y|X),

Z],

where

EN(Y X)

is the first-stage estimate of E(ylx).

Many non-

parametric estimates of E(y IXi)are weighted averages of the form EN(Y IXi)= WiNY,
with WiNdetermining the specific estimate; see Hardle (1990). Hence, estimates of (3, 77)
reported in the spatial correlation literature can be interpreted as estimates of pure
endogenous-effects models.
Note that point estimates can be obtained for unidentified models. If condition a, b,
or d of Proposition 2 holds, then E(y Ix) is a linear function of [1, z]. But the estimate
EN(Y Ix) typically is linearly independent of [1, z]. So the two-stage procedure typically
produces an estimate for 13even when this parameter is unidentified.7
3. NON-LINEAR ENDOGENOUS-EFFECTS

MODELS

How do the findings reported in Section 2 fare when the social-effects model is not
necessarily linear? This section examines two situations. Section 3.1 assumes that one
7. It is necessary to point out that empirical studies reporting two-stage estimates of social-effects models
have routinely misreported the sampling distribution of their estimates. The practice in two-stage estimation
of exogenous-effects models has been to treat the first-stage estimate EN(Z Ix) as if it were E(z Ix) rather than
an estimate thereof. The literature on spatial correlation models has presumed that equation (7) holds as stated
and has not specified how the weights WiN should change with N.
Two-stage estimation of social-effects models is similar to other semi-parametric two-stage estimation
problems whose asymptotic properties have been studied recently. Ahn and Manski (1993), Ichimura and Lee
(1991), and others have analyzed the asymptotic behaviour of various estimators whose first stage is nonparametric regression and whose second stage is parametric estimation conditional on the first-stage estimate.
It is typically found that the second-stage estimate of an identified parameter is vN-consistent with a limiting
normal distribution if the first-stage estimator is chosen appropriately. The variance of the limiting distribution
is typically larger than that which would prevail if the first-stage regression were known rather than estimated.
It seems likely that this result holds here as well.

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

538

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES

does not know the form of the regression and so analyses social effects non-parametrically.
Section 3.2 assumes that the regression is a member of a specified non-linear family of
functions. To keep the analysis relatively simple, I restrict attention to pure endogenouseffects models.
3.1. Non-parametric analysis
Assume that, for some unknown function f: R1 x RK
E(y Ix, z) =fjE(y

-

R1,

x), z].

(8)

This non-parametric endogenous-effects model, with the implied social equilibrium
equation
E(ylx)=

J|IE(y

jx), z]dP(z Ix),

(9)

drops the linearity assumption imposed in Section 2.3.
In this non-parametric setting, one measures endogenous effects directly rather than
through a parameter. That is, one fixes z and asks howfJ[E(yx), z] varies with E(ylx).
Let CE RK and (eo, el) E R2. Then the contrast
T(el, eo, C)=f(el,

C)-f(eo, C)

(10)

measures the effect at ; of exogenously changing mean reference-group behaviour from
eo to el. In the absence of functional form assumptions, f( , - ) is identified on the support
of [E(y|x), z]. The contrast T(el, eo, ;) is identified if and only if (el, ;) and (eo, C)
are both on the support of [E(y |x), z].
To say more requires that one characterize the support of [E(y Ix), z]. Useful
conditions ensuring that contrasts are identified seem hard to obtain. On the other hand,
I can show that contrasts are generically not identified if x and z are either functionally
dependent or statistically independent.
Proposition 3. In the non-parametric endogenous-effects model (8), no contrasts of
the form (10) are identified if any of these conditions hold, almost everywhere:
(e) z is a function of x and the social equilibriumequation (9) has a unique solution.
(f) z is statistically independent of x and the social equilibrium equation (9) has a
unique solution.
(g) x is a function of z.
Proof. If E(y Ix) is a function of z, (e1,,) and (eo, C)cannot both be on the support
of (x, z). So no contrasts are identified. Conditions e, f and g all imply that E(y|x)
is a function of z.
(e) Let CE RK. The distribution of x conditional on the event [z = f] is concentrated
on the set X(;) -[x: z(x) = C]; hence, the distribution of E(y Ix) conditional
on the event [z = (] is concentrated on [E(y Ix), x E X(;)]. For x E X(;), P(z Ix)
has all its mass at the point C. Hence, for xe-X(C), equation (9) reduces to

E(y Ix) = f[E(y Ix), C]. So E(y Ix) solves the same equationfor each x in X(C).

The uniqueness assumption then implies that E(y Ix) is constant on X(C). So
E(y Ix) is a function of z, almost everywhere.

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

MANSKI

THE REFLECTION PROBLEM

539

(f) Statistical independence means that P(z jx) = P(z). Hence (9) reduces to
z]dP(z). So E(y Ix) solves the same equation for each
E(yIx)=JIfE(yIx),
value of x. The uniqueness assumption then implies that E(y |x) is constant for
all values of x.

(g) Let x-x(z).

Then E[ylx(z)] is a function of z.

is really linear
A useful way to think about the proposition is to imagine that f(,)
with ,3 $ 1 but, not knowing this, one proceeds non-parametrically. The linear model has
a unique social equilibrium so conditions e, f, and g all apply. Taken together, the
conditions say that non-parametric identification of endogenous effects is precluded if
the attributes defining reference groups and those directly affecting outcomes are functionally dependent or statistically independent. Non-parametric study of social effects
remains conceivable only if x and z are "moderately related" random variables.
- ) is non-linear in a manner that
f,
The prospects for identification may improve iff(
generates multiple social equilibria. In this case, condition g remains in effect but e and
f do not apply. When there are multiple equilibria, E (y Ix) may fluctuate from one
equilibrium value to another and so may not be a function of z.
3.2. Binary response models
Perhaps the most familiar non-linear parametric models with endogenous effects are
binary response models. Let y be a binary random variable and assume that

P(y = 1|x, z) = H[ar + ,BP(y = 1 | x) +

z'77],

(1

where H(-) is a specified continuous, strictly increasing distribution function. For
example, if H(*) is the logistic distribution, we have a logit model with social effects.
Models of form (11) have been estimated by two-stage methods. The usual approach
is to estimate P(y = 1 | x) non-parametrically and then estimate (,p, y) by maximizing the
quasi-likelihood in which PN(Y = 1 |x) takes the place of P(y = 1 |x). Examples include
Case and Katz (1991) and Gamoran and Mare (1989). A multinomial response model
estimated in this manner appears in Manski and Wise (1983, Chapter 6).
The literature has not addressed the coherency and identification of model (11) but
I can settle the coherency question here. The model is coherent if there is a solution to
the social equilibrium equation
P(y=l|x)=J

H[a+,8P(y=1lx)+z'77]dP(z|x).

(12)

so there is a unique solution to (12). If ,8<0,
If ,=O, E(ylx)=JH(a+z'n)dP(zlx)
the right-hand side of (12) decreases strictly and continuously from JH (a + z'77)dP(z Ix)
to JH(a +P3+z'7) dP(zIx) as E(ylx) rises from 0 to 1. Meanwhile, the left-hand side
increases strictly and continuously from 0 to 1. Hence the left- and right-hand sides cross
at a unique value of E(y Ix).
> 0. In this case, a solution exists because the right-hand side of (12)
Finally, let ,X3
increases strictly and continuously from JH(a + z'77)dP(z Ix) to J H(a +,8 + z'77)dP(z lx)
as E (y Ix) rises from 0 to 1. Meanwhile, the left-hand side traverses the larger interval
[0, 1]. Hence, the left-hand side must cross the right-hand side from below at some value
of E(yIx).
The above shows that binary response models with endogenous effects are always
coherent. When P8s 0, these models have unique social equilibria. When 3> 0, it does

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

540

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES

not appear possible to determine the number of equilibria without imposing additional
structure. The conditions under which the parameters (a, /3, 77) are identified have not
been established.
4. DYNAMIC MODELS
The models posed thus far assume contemporaneous effects. It may well be more realistic
to assume some lag in the transmission of these effects. Some authors, including Alessie
and Kapteyn (1991) and Borjas (1991), have estimated the following dynamic version of
the linear model (2):
E,(y Ix, z)

+ PEt-,(y IX) + Et-I(z Ix)ly + X"S+ zt'
(13)
where Et and E,_1 denote expectations taken at periods t and t- 1. The idea is that
non-social forces act contemporaneously but social forces act on the individual with a lag.
If {E(z|x), x, z} are time-invariant and -1<j8 < 1, the dynamic process (13) has a
unique stable temporal equilibrium of the form (3). If one observes the process in temporal
equilibrium, the identification analysis of Section 2 holds without modification. On the
other hand, if one observes the process out of equilibrium, the recursive structure of (13)
opens new possibilities for identification.
One should not, however, conclude that dynamic models solve the problem of
identifying social effects. To exploit the recursive structure of (13), a researcher must
maintain the hypothesis that the transmission of social effects really follows the assumed
temporal pattern. But empirical studies typically provide no evidence for any particular
timing. Some authors assume that individuals are influenced by the behaviour of their
contemporaries, some assume a time lag of a few years, while others assume that social
effects operate across generations.
=

5. DEMAND ANALYSIS
In Section 1, I noted that mainstream economic demand models embody an endogenous
social effect: individual demand for a product varies with price, which is partly determined
by aggregate demand in the relevant market. This section elaborates.
Let y denote a consumer's demand for a given product. Let x denote the market in
which the consumer operates; different values of x may, for example, refer to different
geographic areas or to different time periods. Let p(x) be the market equilibrium price
in market x. Then a conventional model of consumer demand assumes that, conditioning
on consumer attributes, the market in which a consumer operates affects demand only
through the price prevailing in that market. A common empirical formulation is
(14)
E(y Ix, z) = D[p(x), z],
where z are consumer attributes observed by the researcher and where D(*, *) is mean
demand conditional on (x, z).
Market equilibrium models assume that the price p(x) is determined by aggregate
demand in market x and by supply conditions in this market. Let the population of
consumers living in market x have size m(x). Then E(y|x) is per capita demand in
market x and E(yIx)m(x) is aggregate demand. Let s(x) denote the relevant supply
conditions. Then
p(x)=-[E(y

| x)m(x), s(x)]

expresses the determination of price by demand and supply.

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

(15)

MANSKI

THE REFLECTION PROBLEM

541

Equations (14) and (15) imply that

E(y Ix,z) = D{i[E(y

Ix)m(x), s(x)], z}.

(16)

This is an endogenous effects model of a type distinct from (8). Conditional on z, y
varies with x only through E(ylx) in (8) but varies with x through [E(ylx)m(x), s(x)]
in (16). Equation (16) reduces to (8) if m( - ) and s( - ) do not vary with x; that is, if the
population of consumers has the same size in all markets and if supply conditions are
homogeneous across markets. In this case, the variation of price across markets derives
entirely from variation in the distribution p(z Ix) of consumer attributes. The findings of
Sections 2 and 3 then apply to the problem of identifying the consumer demand function.
6. CONCLUSION
This paper has analyzed the problem of identifying endogenous social effects from
observations of the distribution of behaviour in a population. We have found that there
may be realistic prospects for inference on endogenous effects if the attributes defining
reference groups and those directly affecting outcomes are moderately related. On the
other hand, the prospects are poor to nil if these attributes are either functionally dependent
or are statistically independent. Moreover, observations of behaviour cannot be used to
identify individuals' reference groups.
The only ways to improve the prospects for identification are to develop tighter
theory or to collect richer data. I have no thoughts to offer on tighter theory but I see
much that we can do to collect richer data. The analysis of this paper has presumed that
inferences are based only on observed behaviour. Empirical evidence may also be obtained
from controlled experiments and from subjective data, the statements people make about
why they behave as they do. (Jones (1984) surveys some experiments conducted by social
psychologists.) Given that identification based on observed behaviour alone is so tenuous,
experimental and subjective data will have to play an important role in future efforts to
learn about social effects.
Acknowledgement: This research is supported by National Science Foundation Grant SES-8808276 and
by National Institute of Child Health and Human Development grant iROl HD25842 HLB. I have benefitted
from discussions with numerous colleagues and from the comments of the reviewers.
REFERENCES
AHN, H. and MANSKI, C. (1993), "Distribution Theory for the Analysis of Binary Choice Under Uncertainty
with Nonparametric Estimation of Expectations", Journal of Econometrics (forthcoming).
AKERLOF, G. (1980), "A Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment may be One Consequence",
QuarterlyJournal of Economics, 94, 749-775.
ALESSIE, R. and KAPTEYN, A. (1991), "Habit Formation, Interdependent Preferences and Demographic
Effects in the Almost Ideal Demand System", The Economic Journal, 101, 404-419.
ASCH, S. E. (1952) Social Psychology (Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall).
BANDURA, A. (1986) Social Foundations of Thought and Action (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall).
BANK, B., SLAVINGS, R. and BIDDLE, B. (1990), "Effects of Peer, Faculty, and Parental Influences on
Students' Persistence", Sociology of Education, 63, 208-225.
BERNHEIM, D. (1991), "A Theory of Conformity" (Department of Economics, Princeton University).
BORJAS, G. (1991), "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108,
123-150.
CASE, A. (1991), "Spatial Patterns in Household Demand", Econometrica, 59, 953-965.
CASE, A. and KATZ, L. (1991), "The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and Neighborhood on
Disadvantaged Youth" (Working Paper No. 3705, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass.).
CLIFF, A. and ORD, J. (1981) Spatial Processes (London: Pion).
COLEMAN, J., CAMPBELL, E., HOBSON, C., MCPARTLAND, J., MOOD, A., WEINFELD, F. and YORK,
R. (1966) Equality of Educational Opportunity(Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office).

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

542

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES

CONLISK, J. (1980), "Costly Optimizers Versus Cheap Imitators", Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1, 275-293.
CRANE, J. (1991), "The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on Dropping Out and Teenage
Childbearing", American Journal of Sociology, 96, 1226-1259.
DUESENBERRY, J. (1949) Income, Savings, and the Theory of Consumption (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press).
DUNCAN, O., HALLER, A. and PORTES, A. (1968), "Peer Influences on Aspirations: A Reinterpretation",
American Journal of Sociology, 74, 119-137.
ERBRING, L. and YOUNG, A. (1979), "Individuals and Social Structure: Contextual Effects as Endogenous
Feedback", Sociological Methods and Research, 7, 396-430.
FRIEDMAN, M. (1957) A Theory of the Consumption Function (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
GAERTNER, W. (1974), "A Dynamic Model of Interdependent Consumer Behavior", Zeitschrift fur
Nationaldkonomie, 70, 312-326.
GAMORAN, A. and MARE, R. (1989), "Secondary School Tracking and Educational Inequality: Compensation, Reinforcement, or Neutrality?", American Journal of Sociology, 94, 1146-1183.
HARDLE, W. (1990) Applied Nonparametric Regression (New York: Cambridge University Press).
HAUSER, R. (1970), "Context and Consex: A Cautionary Tale", American Journal of Sociology, 75, 645-664.
HYMAN, H. (1942), "The Psychology of Status", Archives of Psychology, No. 269.
ICHIMURA, H. and LEE, L. (1991), "Semiparametric Estimation of Multiple Indices Models: Single Equation
Estimation", in W. Barnett, J. Powell, and G. Tauchen (editors), Nonparametric and Semiparametric
Methods in Econometrics and Statistics (New York: Cambridge University Press).
JENCKS, C. and MAYER, S. (1989), "Growing Up in Poor Neighborhoods: How Much Does it Matter?",
Science, 243, 1441-1445.
JONES, S. (1984) The Economics of Conformism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
MANSKI, C. (1993a), "Dynamic Choice in a Social Setting: Learning from the Experiences of Others", Journal
of Econometrics, 58, 121-136.
MANSKI, C. (1993b), "Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to Schooling?", in C.
Clotfelter and M. Rothschild (editors), Studies in the Supply and Demand of Higher Education (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
MANSKI, C. and WISE, D. (1983) College Choice in America (Cambridge; Mass.: Harvard University Press).
MAYER, S. (1991), "How Much Does a High School's Racial and Socioeconomic Mix Affect Graduation and
Teenage Fertility Rates?", in C. Jencks and P. Peterson (editors), The Urban Underclass (Washington,
D.C.: The Brookings Institution).
MERTON, R. (1957) Social Theory and Social Structure (Glencoe: The Free Press).
POLLAK, R. (1976), "Interdependent Preferences", American Economic Review, 78, 745-763.
SCHELLING, T. (1971), "Dynamic Models of Segregation", Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 1, 143-186.
SEWELL, W. and ARMER, J. (1966), "Neighborhood Context and College Plans", American Sociological
Review, 31, 159-168.
WOITTIEZ, I. and KAPTEYN, A. (1991), "Social Interactions and Habit Formation in a Labor Supply Model"
(Department of Economics, University of Leiden).

This content downloaded on Sun, 13 Jan 2013 09:56:17 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

