[Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Dummy Endogenous Regressors:
Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice]: Comment
Author(s): John Mullahy
Source: Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Jan., 2001), pp. 23-25
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392535
Accessed: 07-03-2019 22:29 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Business & Economic Statistics

This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Mullahy:

Comment

structural

object

of

23

estimation
and
Heckman, J. (1997), "Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit
Behavioral
Assumptions Used in Making Program
Evaluations," Journal of Human
applied
econom

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This comment is a revision of remarks delivered at the

Resources, 32, 441-462.

- (1999), "Instrumental Variables: A Reply to Angrist and Imbens,"
Journal of Human Resources, 34, 828-837.

--(2000), "Causal Parameters and Policy Analysis in Economics: A
Twentieth Century Retrospective," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115,

Joint Statistical Meetings, Baltimore, August 1999. I 45-97.
thank
Heckman, J., and MaCurdy, T. (1985), "A Simultaneous Equations Linear
Carl Christ, James Heckman, Joel Horowitz, Michael Keane,
Probability Model," International Economic Review, 18, 21-37.
Thomas Mroz, Geert Ridder, and Edward Vyltacil for
com- J., and Vytlacil, E. (1999), "Local Instrumental Variables and
Heckman,
Latent
ments, with the usual disclaimer that the views expressed
hereVariable Models for Identifying and Bounding Treatment Effects,"

should not be taken as representing those of any of Proceedings
these

of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 4730-4734.
Horowitz, J. (1993), "Semiparametric and Nonparametric Estimation of Quan-

individuals.

tal Response Models," in Handbook of Statistics (Vol. 11), eds. G. S.
Maddala, C. R. Rao, and H. D. Vinod, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES

45-72.

Ichimura, H., and Thompson, T. (1998), "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of
a Binary Choice Model With Random Coefficients of Unknown DistribuAngrist, J., and Imbens, G. (1999), Comment on "Instrumental Variables:
tion,"
Journal of Econometrics, 86, 269-295.
A Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions Used in Making
ProManski, 34,
C. (1988), "Identification of Binary Choice Models," Journal of the
gram Evaluations," by J. J. Heckman, Journal of Human Resources,
283-827.
American Statistical Association, 83, 729-738.
Blundell, R., and Smith, R. (1993), "Simultaneous MicroeconometricMarschak,
Models
J. (1953), "Economic Measurements for Policy and Prediction,"
With Censored or Qualitative Dependent Variables," in Handbook of Statisin Studies in Econometric Method, eds. W. Hood and T. Koopmans,
New York: Wiley, pp. 1-26.
tics (Vol. 1), eds. G. S. Maddala, C. R. Rao, and H. D. Vinod, Amsterdam:
North-Holland, pp. 117-141.
Powell, J. (1994), "Estimation of Semiparametric Models," in Handbook of
Christ, C. (1994), "The Cowles Commission's Contributions to Econometrics
Econometrics (Vol. 4), eds. R. Engle and D. McFadden, Amsterdam: Northat Chicago, 1939-1955," Journal of Economic Literature, 32, 30-59.Holland, pp. 2443-2521.

Comment
John MULLAHY

Departments of Preventive Medicine and Economics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705, and
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA (imullahy@facstaff.wisc.edu)
Articles bearing titles containing phrases like "Simple a broad description of how such instruments might be used to
Strategies for Empirical Practice" are often wolves masquerad- elicit interesting causal inferences in LDV contexts.

I have no real quibbles with any of the substance of

ing as sheep, the methodologies they devise being far from

"simple" and far removed from what most humble practition- Angrist's arguments. Rather, I will devote my commentary
ers perceive in the realm of "empirical practice." Not so here.mainly to amplifying and expanding several of the themes he
Joshua Angrist has written a tight, comprehensive article thatdevelops throughout the article.
is stimulating and important, yet also eminently useful.

1. FOCUS ON CAUSAL OR PARTIAL EFFECTS

As typifies much of Angrist's work, the main concern in this

VERSUS FOCUS ON CONDITIONAL

article is on how to elicit interesting characterizations of causal

effects from microdata, with the particular twist here being a

focus on outcomes measured as "limited dependent variables"
(LDV's). The main take-away message I glean from this arti-

EXPECTATIONS FUNCTIONS

It seems fair to suggest that much of applied microeconometrics is concerned primarily with understanding the signs

cle is that applied analysts working on causal effect or struc- and magnitudes of quantities like 8E[YIX, D]/8(X, D) or
tural analyses in LDV contexts-traditionally vexing contexts 8E[YIX]/8X. Yet much of the actual dirty work in under-

insofar as consistent estimation and inference are concerned-

taking causal analysis in LDV contexts seems to result from
have considerable grounds for optimism. Angrist lays out and
decisions to undertake analyses in settings where E[YIX, D]
interprets systematically a set of issues and methods that proor E[YIX] are restricted to be positive without a priori restricvide practitioners with a variety of implementable strategies
tions on parameter values [thus the tradition of using tobit-

that might be brought to bear on such empirical problems.
class conditional expectations functions (CEF's), two-step
A corollary take-away message is that in some respects "this
selection models, exponential CEF's, etc.].
stuff is not really as hard as we've tended to make it," withAs practitioners, however, we should pause to assess

Angrist demonstrating, for instance, the potential meritswhether
of
specifications akin to E[YIX, D] = exp(X/3 + aD) >
simple linear instrumental variable (IV) methods for estimating causal effects in a variety of LDV contexts. In no event
can applied analysts escape the requirement of finding theoretically sound instruments, but Angrist exposits compellingly

? 2001 American Statistical Association

Journal of Business & Economic Statistics

This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

January 2001, Vol. 19, No. 1

24 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, January 2001

all the concerns
about zeros, with
robustness,
outliers, transforma
0 are ultimately buying anything
important
respect
to
the first-order questions being
explored.
is
only
comtion, retransformation,
andIt
such
that
have typically
attende
mon sense that analysts should
spend
relatively
more
energy
modeling efforts involving two-part models, it would be sur

working on understanding quantities
of primary
interest
prising in a well-structured
empirical investigation
if there
(e.g., 8E[YIX, D]/8(X, D)) and
worrying
less
were not
stated or lurkingrelatively
concerns about partial
effec
about the formulation and implications
of
assumptions
8E[YIX]/8X and/or
CEF's
E[YIX] themselves.(e.g.,
It may be i
E[YIX, D] > 0) that may have
little
or
no
ultimate
bearing
some
cases that
such
concerns
are not articulated,
and it m
on the particular questions even
being
addressed.
Thisthat
isthey
espebe in less
well-structured problems
are not obv

cially so when the latter effort
viaYet,
functional
form
ous(restricting
to analysts themselves.
for instance, unless
robustl

choice E[YIX, D] > 0) will tend
top'scomplicate
rather
than
estimated
from a log-linear part-2
specification
of a two
facilitate the former effort (understanding
the
partial
or causal
part model could inform
a first-order
question
about a pareffects). This is not to suggest
quantities
like E[YIX]
and
tial that
effect or
a CEF, of what practical
use were they
likely

E[YIX, D] may not themselves to
be
to rather
estimate
(e.g., was
be?interesting
My rather modest and
obvious argument
modeling conditional mean health
care
expenditures
for use
in
just that
the concerns
about the 8E[YIX]/8X
or the
E[YIX

forecasting future expenditure
levels),
whether
E[YIX,
D] in th
if they
are the but
reason the
analysis is being
conducted
is parametrically and parsimoniously
better
approximated
by
first place-should enjoy first-order prominence in the
estim

exp(Xp + aD) or by XP + aDtion
or
by and
some
other
+ aD)
exercise
that concerns
about g(Xp
zeros, outliers,
and suc

or h(X, D, y) is--even in LDV
ical matter to be assessed by
tional moment tests).

settings-ultimately
empirshould
be relegated in some sense toan
second-order
status. In
goodness
of
fit
(e.g.,
via
condisome cases, two-part models will serve nicely
to address suc
first-order concerns-at least in reduced-form settings-but

I note this important angle
somewhat sheepishly since
others they will not.
in both articles of mine thatAngrist
Angrist
cites (Mullahy 1997,
appears to have some sympathy with such argu-

1998) there is considerable emphasis on the use of exponenments, but more importantly he provides a valuable service

tial CEF specifications as enforcers of positive conditional

to users of two-part models by unearthing one major limimean "requirements." In fact, the main motivation for the

tation in the analysis of causal effects. The problem is n
earlier article was to find a general approach to obtaining

with part 1 (i.e., the logit, probit, or linear probability com
consistent estimators of structural parameters in parametric
ponent) because part 1 of the two-part model falls within th
settings less distribution-bound than tobit-class models when
main lines of Angrist's LDV analysis. Rather, the complicatio
the key requirement or side constraint is E[YIX, D] > 0, with
arises with part 2 of the two-part model in which the additiona
the resulting strategy a more or less brute-force method for
"Y > 0" conditioning arises. In the standard (reduced-form
accomplishing this in a nonlinear IV setting. Angrist's artitwo-part model, quantities like E[YIX, Y > 0] are prominent
cle takes this idea quite a bit further and demonstrates how
and identified readily. But in the counterfactual settings in
(and with the addition of a further normalization) the strucwhich causal effects are manifested, wherein the realized Y
tural parameter estimation approach I discussed can be develarises from self-selection into or out of treatment, such sele
oped into a model to analyze causal effects when the latter are
tion effects introduce an ambiguity [Eq. (12)] and thereb
characterized as "proportional treatment effects."
confound the ability to glean causal effects from part-2 est
Whether a proportional, as opposed to an additive, treatment
mates (unless, as Angrist notes, censored regression method
effect is interesting (it may or may not be) remains to be seen
are used, but Angrist also offers some compelling argumen

in any particular application. Wooldridge's recent work on
against blind reliance on censored regression approaches). A
average causal effects (ACE's; Wooldridge 1999) would seem

such, if estimation of and inference about causal effects ar
pertinent in contexts in which the role of the X covariates is

the primary analytical concerns in data settings with Y>
and Pr(Y
= 0) extent
> 0, analysts
may
be well advised
to avoid
effect setup. As a general matter,
the
to
which
infertwo-part
modeling
strategies
and
pursue
some
of
the
more
ences about causal effects-however formulated-hinge on
direct
linear
and
nonlinear
estimation
approaches
discussed
the inclusion of particular covariates as conditioning regresby Angrist in which
one-part estimation
approaches-zer
sors is an interesting and potentially
important
angle
that
and
all!-yield
estimates
of
causal
effects
that
will be to
directl
Angrist's article begins to explore and is one that likely

more "intrusive" than in the simple additive/linear treatment-

merit additional research. Forinterpretable.
the particular issues at hand,
the very nature of proportional treatment effects brings into
BEYOND
CEF'S correlation
focus explicitly the role of the X's, so 3.
how
their
with the treatment indicators (D) influences inferences about
One noteworthy feature of the methods Angrist disc
the causal impacts of the latter would seem to be a first-order
with
the main results attributed to Abadie (1999)-are th
consideration.
applicability to estimation of causal effects for character
2. TWO-PART MODELS

of the conditional distribution 4(YIX, D) beyond just CE
Estimation of causal or treatment effects for conditional

(QTE's) and conditional distribution function ordin
I found Angrist's analysis of the interpretation oftiles
causal

effects in two-part models to be extremely illuminating.
("distiles"), Pr(Y < clX, D), is demonstrated to fit pro
In a reduced-form setting, I argued (Mullahy 1998) that,
amid the weighting strategies advanced by Abadie.
within
This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Todd:

Comment

25

4. CONCLUSIONS
and
disti
ing
particular
an
Practitioners of applied microeconometrics will find
the
ability
to
ex
the time invested in a careful reading of Angrist's arti
mation
strategies
sizable returns, not merely because of the analytical an
applied
researche
ceptual insights it offers but ultimately also because it
I
might
suggest
gests a variety of important practical innovations that a
quantile
causal
an
researchers can exploit empirically to more clearly unde
the
latter
relies
o
the nature of causal relationships in their data. Applied
is
perhaps
overso

quantile

and

researchers in areas like health, labor, development,
policy-relev

finance, and such work commonly with data wherein (
ordinates
come measures are limited--often most importantly be
ers
to
offer
more
they are nonnegative with mass points at 0-and (b) the
What
factors
cau
of conditioning covariates (X's) are most conveniently su
more
than
two
d
rized via regression methods. Angrist's article provides a
individuals
to
uti
researchers so endowed with a set of powerful tools fo
uct? What factors cause second earners to work more than
iting causal inferences from such data. Of course, the p
17 hours per week? Each of these concerns an important
line is familiar and inevitable: All bets are off without t
real-world causal question for which the application-specific
retically solid instruments. But with such instruments in
specific

ordinate-whether for institutional, legal, physiological, or

the strategies exposited by Angrist offer analysts a rich
other reasons-is a fundamental "pivot point" for the analysis.
perspectives on estimation.
Analysis of such distile relationships-whether in causal or in

reduced-form settings-is a potentially powerful method for
informing decision makers, and it seems to me that its mer-

ADDITIONAL REFERENCE

Wooldridge, J. M. (1999), "Estimating Average Partial Effects Under Con-

its relative to quantile analyses would have to be judged on ditional
a
Moment Independence Assumptions," mimeo, Michigan State

case-by-case basis.

University, Dept. of Economics.

Comment
Petra TODD

Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 (petra@athona.sas.upenn.ed
This article considers ways of estimating the effectreceived
of
some treatment and having received no treatment (or
binary, endogenous regressors in models with limited depenpossibly a different treatment). For each individual, only one
dent variables. It questions the usefulness of conventional
of the potential outcome states is observed, which leads to a
estimation strategies aimed at recovering structural model
missing-data problem in attempting to draw inferences about
parameters and advocates the use of simple instrumental variaspects of the treatment effect distribution.
ables (IV) estimators as an alternative, on the grounds that
The language of potential outcomes is very general, so

these estimators invoke weaker assumptions and often suffice
almost any economic problem could be formulated in these

to answer questions of interest in empirical studies. Interms.
the However, this does not mean that estimators proposed
author's view, the main challenge facing empirical researchers
in the literature for the causal model are useful for all or even
is the problem of identification of "treatment effects" through
most economic problems. A major limitation of the model
IV. Here, I expand the discussion by considering two quesis that it assumes that the state "with treatment" has been

tions: (1) What are the limitations of the causal modelobserved
as
for at least a subset of people. In medical trials or
a paradigm for policy analysis? (2) When simple estimators
biological experiments, this assumption is probably reason-

are suitable for answering a question of interest, what are able,
the but in economics we often are interested in evaluating
effects of treatments that have not yet been implemented. For

trade-offs that need to be considered in using them?

1. WHEN IS THE "CAUSAL MODEL" A USEFUL
PARADIGM FOR POLICY ANALYSIS?

example, we might be interested in predicting the effect of

raising the age receiving Social Security benefits to a new age
or the effect of introducing new term limits on welfare participation. An implicit assumption needed to apply any of the
The article gives the impression that most interesting questions in economics can be answered within the context of
identification results described in this article is that both Y,

the "causal model" [variously attributed to Neyman (1923),
Fisher (1935), Cox (1958), Roy (1951), and Rubin (1978)].
The causal model is a very general framework that assumes

? 2001 American Statistical Association

Journal of Business & Economic Statistics

that there are potential outcome states, associated with having
This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

January 2001, Vol. 19, No. 1

