Journal of Economic Literature
Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000) pp. 827–874
Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Journal
Natural
“Natural
of Economic
Literature, Vol.Experiments”
XXXVIII (December 2000)

Natural “Natural Experiments”
in Economics
M ARK R. R OSENZWEIG and K ENNETH I. W OLPIN 1
1. Introduction

that more able individuals prefer schooling or face lower schooling costs. Similarly, that fertility and female labor supply are negatively correlated may reflect
variation in preferences for children and
work in the population.
Economists have used experiments
that purposively randomize treatments
to assess their effects in the presence of
heterogeneity. Among the issues that
some of the most prominent experiments have addressed are the impact of
a negative income tax on labor supply,
the effects of class size on test outcomes, and the effects of job training
programs on earnings. However, these
“man-made” experiments are subject to
the criticisms that they lack generalizability and, most importantly, often
do not adhere in implementation to the
requirements of treatment randomness.
The most widely applied approach to
identifying causal or treatment effects,
which has a long history in economics,
employs instrumental variable techniques. This approach essentially assumes that some components of nonexperimental data are random. That is,
it is assumed that some variable or
event satisfies the criterion of “randomness”—the event or variable is orthogonal to the unobservable and unmalleable factors that could affect the
outcomes under study. This assumption,
along with a set of additional assumptions

T

HE COSTLINESS OF and limitations
on experiments involving human
subjects have long been identified as major constraints on the progress of economic science. Indeed, it has been increasingly recognized that identification
of many interesting parameters, such as
the effects of schooling or work experience on earnings or of income on savings, requires attention to the fact that
the variation in many of the variables
whose effects are of interest may not be
orthogonal to unobservable factors that
jointly affect the outcomes studied. Such
unmeasured or unmeasurable factors
may include pre-existing or endowed
skills (“ability”), preferences, or technologies that vary across individuals or
firms in the economy. The possible existence of heterogeneity in these attributes
means that almost all estimates are open
to alternative interpretations in terms of
self-selection by such traits. In determining the returns to schooling, for example,
individuals cannot be considered to be
randomly sorted among schooling levels.
Thus, that more-schooled individuals
have higher earnings may reflect the fact
1 University of Pennsylvania. We are grateful to
two anonymous referees and the editor for helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper. Partial
support for the research was provided by NIH
grants HD30907 and AG11725 and NSF grants
SBR95–11955 and SBR93–08405.

827

828

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

about behavior, yields estimates of economic parameters that are of general
interest, e.g., the returns to schooling,
the income elasticity of savings. Not
surprisingly, the assumptions made, inclusive of randomness, are subject to
much skepticism.
Given the difficulties of carrying out
and financing experiments with nearperfect random treatments to answer
questions of general importance and
the lack of credibility of many of the
assumptions of standard instrumental
variable studies, economists as well as
researchers in other fields have sought
out “natural experiments,” random
treatments that have arisen serendipitously. These putative natural experiments are usually changes or spatial
variation in rules governing behavior,
which are assumed to satisfy the randomness criterion. Indeed, 72 studies
using the phrase “natural experiment”
in the title or abstract issued or published since 1968 are listed in the Journal of Economic Literature cumulative
index. 2 Many of these studies do not
produce easily generalizable results about
behavior because of the specific nature
of the rule changes that are studied, as
in the randomized-experiment literature. The major problem with these
studies, however, is that the assumption
of randomness is not credible.
In recent years economists, in recognition that “nature” provides almost
perfect randomness with respect to im2 Among the “natural” experiments in these
studies are changes in nineteenth-century Brooklyn welfare laws, cross-country differences in East
African educational policies, the introduction of a
Civil-War-era union pension plan, cross-state differences in wage distributions, trade policy reform
in New Zealand, the passage of the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986, differences in salary restrictions
across U.S. professional basketball and baseball,
the introduction of Eastern European privatization rules, changes in Ohio rules for financing
mental health care, and British dividend tax reforms.

portant variables, have ingeniously exploited naturally random events as instrumental variables. 3 These natural
natural experiment studies have attracted a great deal of attention both
because of the appeal of the instruments and because the studies have addressed important questions in economics. Five major random outcomes that
arise from biological and climate mechanisms have been used as instruments:
twin births, human cloning (monozygotic twins), birth date, gender, and
weather events. These natural outcomes, which are plausibly random with
respect to at least two of the major
sources of heterogeneity in human
populations—tastes and abilities—have
been used to study three issues: What
are the returns to schooling and labor
market experience? How sensitive are
consumption, savings, and labor supply
to temporary and permanent changes
in income? How responsive is women’s
labor force participation to fertility
change?
This review essay examines this recent literature exploiting natural events
as instruments to assess to what extent
it has advanced empirical knowledge.
The advantage of the natural natural experimental approach is that the assumption of randomness for the instrumental
variables employed is more credible
than for those instruments used in almost all other studies. But a weakness
of many of the studies that adopt this
approach is that the necessary additional behavioral, market, and technological assumptions needed to justify the
authors’ interpretations of the estimates
obtained are absent. The impression
3 Other scientists have also exploited natural
events, the most prominent studies being those
based on human cloning (twins) that attempt to
identify the separate roles of genetics and environment (e.g., K. McCourt, T. J. Bouchard, David T.
Lykken, M. A. Tellegen, M. Keyes 1999).

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
left by this literature is that if one accepts that the instruments are perfectly
random and plausibly affect the variable
whose effect is of interest, then the instrumental-variables estimates are conclusive. Indeed, part of the appeal of
this literature is its simplicity, in contrast, for example, to the structural estimation literature, in which complex estimation strategies are used to identify
the structural parameters of fully parameterized but highly restrictive models. A
characteristic of this approach is that all
assumptions are transparent, but the
structure of these models incorporates,
as does any economic model, strong and
sometimes unappealing assumptions
about behavior or markets, and about
functional forms and statistical distributions, often made strictly for reasons
of tractability.
However, the absence of models in
the natural natural experiment literature does not mean that there are no
important and implausible assumptions
being implicitly used by the authors in
interpreting the estimates they have obtained. Randomness and explanatory
power are necessary but not sufficient
conditions for identification of a parameter that is of interest. Moreover, in
the few cases where an explicit model is
used to motivate the specification and
exclusion restrictions used, it is not always clear how robust is the study’s interpretation to even minor changes in
the model. In this review we (i) summarize the methodology and findings from
twenty studies employing natural events
as instruments; (ii) examine and clarify
the set of assumptions, beyond the randomness of the natural events, that are
implicitly made in these studies that
lead to the authors’ conclusions about
the empirical results obtained; (iii) show
how the relaxation of some of these
restrictions, consistent with empirical
evidence or with well-established mod-

829

els and/or evidence in the literature,
changes the interpretation of the results; and (iv) provide additional empirical evidence on the validity of these
implicitly made assumptions using the
same set of natural events. We clarify
the assumptions and the interpretation
of the studies’ findings by constructing
simple economic models pertinent to
the phenomena studied. The new evidence is used to suggest the additional
research, empirical and theoretical, that is
needed to obtain a more reliable understanding of the results from this literature and for future inquiries using the
natural natural experimental approach.
2. Instrumental Variables, Natural
Natural Experiments, and the Role
of Economic Theory
To clarify the empirical methodology
that underlies the natural natural experiment studies and to highlight the issues which we will illuminate by employing simple behavioral models in this
review essay, it is useful to start with a
presentation of the statistical model
used in almost all of the natural natural
experiment studies in its simplest form.
The first element is the equation that
contains the parameter of interest β:
Y = α + βX + ε.

(1)

The canonical problem is that in the
population X is correlated with the error
term ε so that least squares estimates of
β will be biased. The solution proposed
is some variable Z that affects X but is
not correlated with ε.4 This variable is
then used as an instrument for X, and
the instrumental variables estimator is:
βIV =

cov(Y,Z) cov(X,Z)β + cov(ε,Z)
=
.
cov(X,Z)
cov(X,Z)

(2)

4 Most studies in this literature in fact conveniently assume that only one X is correlated with
ε, since then only one natural natural instrument
is required.

830

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

A variant of (2), applied frequently in
the natural natural experiment literature,
is the “Wald” estimator, which is simply
an instrumental variables estimator based
on grouped data (Abraham Wald 1940).
As seen in (2), identification of β thus
requires that Z and X covary but not Z
and ε. Each study must therefore define
what is in the error term in order to
provide a plausible story for why the instrument Z is not correlated with it.
The description of what is in the error
term is thus the critical part of all studies employing instrumental variables.
Because what is in the error term depends in turn on the specification of the
equation of interest, it is important to
have some explicit criteria or framework for deciding what constitutes a
plausible specification of (1), in particular, what other variables besides X belong in (1) and what are the relationships between these other variables and
the X, Z, and ε? It is in providing a coherent framework for answering these
questions that most of the studies employing natural natural experiments fall
short. And, what is excluded from (1)
turns out to be critical in most of the
studies for achieving identification of β.
Our strategy is to show using very simple behavioral models what assumptions
about the characteristics of technology,
preferences, and markets are required
to justify these exclusion restrictions.
We divide our review essay into three
main sections defined by the β of interest. In the first section, we examine
studies in which Y is (log) earnings and
β is the return to human capital investments in the form of either schooling or
post-school investments. The natural
natural experiments considered in this
section include a child’s date of birth, a
child’s gender, the date-of-birth draft
lottery, and human cloning. We first
show that these studies provide a wide
range of estimates of β, are almost

evenly divided with respect to the direction of “ability bias,” and do not
often provide estimates that differ very
much from those obtained using least
squares. With respect to the properties
of the instrumental-variable estimates,
the two studies concerned with the returns to schooling assume that the only
other variable in (1) besides schooling
is age and that the only component of
the error term correlated with schooling is ability. And the sex of one’s sibling, or one’s month of birth, the instruments used, are plausibly assumed to
be uncorrelated with ability. We show
using a very simple model of schooling
choice that the date-of-birth and child
gender instrument do identify, under
these assumptions, the returns to
schooling, but for different ability
groups in the population. We also show,
however, that (i) if work experience is a
better proxy for post-school human
capital than is age, the instrumental estimates of the returns to schooling from
the two natural natural experiment instruments are biased, and the biases go
in opposite directions, and that (ii) if
work choices after school are made optimally and work experience affects
earnings, there is additional bias in the
two IV estimates that will depend on
the age of the sample population. We
also present evidence from U.S. panel
data, using the same natural natural instruments, that work experience is correlated with the error term in (1) and
with schooling. Thus, the particular applications of the two instruments are
likely to provide biased estimates of the
return to schooling. Moreover, the two
instrumental variables estimators will
differ from each other when applied to
the same population, especially if returns differ by ability group, and each
instrumental variable estimate will provide different (biased) estimates for
different-aged populations.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
The seemingly innocuous but empirically dubious assumption used in the
two natural natural experiment schooling studies, that age is the only other
determinant of earnings besides schooling (and ability), turns out to be critical
for identification even if the natural
events used as instruments are uncorrelated with ability. Similarly, we show
using the same behavioral model that
the unstated critical assumptions in the
draft-lottery study of the returns to civilian work experience (where ε is again
defined to be ability and X = experience
in (1)) are (i) that schooling is uncorrelated with ability and (ii) schooling is
uncorrelated with experience. The former assumption is inconsistent with
that made in the natural natural experiment studies of schooling, and the latter we show to be empirically untrue.
Finally, we also consider in this section
the growing set of studies that make use
of natural human cloning to estimate
the return to schooling. We show that
most of these studies provide downward
biased estimates of the return to schooling if work experience is an important
determinant of earnings, even if the
critical assumption that the differences
in the schooling within twin-pairs is
purely random holds. We also show,
however, that evidence on differing
birthweights within pairs of monozygotic (genetically identical) twins and a
plausible model of optimal job-taking
suggest that even with information on
work experience, twin-studies yield estimates of schooling returns that are
likely to be biased, and it is not clear a
priori whether the bias is upwards or
downwards.
In the next section, we look at studies
using weather events as natural instruments to estimate and test hypotheses
about the effects of changes in permanent and transitory income on consumption and labor supply. In these

831

studies β is the permanent or transitory
income effect, and weather events are
plausibly assumed to be orthogonal to
the error term, which implicitly is defined to contain farmer preferences. In
all studies, the sample population consists of farmers. We show using a simple
two-period model that identification of
transitory income effects in these studies depends critically on a number of
assumptions about the structure of preferences and labor markets. In particular, the studies have implicitly assumed
that either family and hired labor are
perfect substitutes, or, if not, that a
market exists for all types of labor, that
labor is perfectly spatially mobile,
and/or that leisure and consumption are
strongly separable. We show that if the
assumption of perfect labor mobility is
relaxed, that even if family and hired labor are perfect substitutes and markets
are complete, the weather-based instrumental estimates of transitory income
effects are biased upwards given the
specifications used in two of the most
well-known studies. We also show, however, using data from a setting similar
to those used in these studies, that the
assumption that family labor is perfectly
substitutable for hired labor is rejected.
The third major section contains a review of studies in which the β of interest is the effect of an exogenous change
in fertility (X) on the labor supply
choices of married women (Y) and that
rely on the occurrence of a twin first
birth or the sex composition of the first
two children as natural natural instruments. In these studies, the error term
is defined to contain preferences, and it
is plausibly assumed that neither having
a twin on the first birth nor the sex of
children are correlated with preferences. To illustrate plausible conditions
under which the random sex-sameness
of children or a twin birth may directly
affect labor supply net of fertility (so

832

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

that Z and ε are not orthogonal as assumed), however, we again set out a
bare-bones model, in this case one in
which parents care about the sex composition of children and make labor
supply and fertility decisions. The
model illustrates the types of strong restrictions required so that the natural
natural instrumental-variable estimate
of the fertility effect on labor supply
based on the sex-sameness of initial
births or twin births corresponds to the
experiment in which fertility itself is
varied exogenously. Here we show that
it is necessary to assume that the sexsameness of births or having twins has no
effect on the costs of children for identification to be achieved, or that strong
assumptions about the separability of
fertility, labor supply and sex-composition
must be imposed. We adduce evidence
from data from rural India that suggests
that the sex-composition of children at
least in that context has significant effects on child-rearing costs so that the
sex-composition instrumental-variables
estimate does not identify β.
In the final section, we assess the
contribution of the natural natural experiment studies and propose a research strategy which makes use of the
general insights of this literature.
3. Estimating the Return to Human
Capital Investments: Schooling and
Work Experience
The presence of “ability bias” in estimates of the return to human capital investments in the form of schooling is a
longstanding problem. Early proposed
solutions to the problem include using
test scores as (imperfect) measures of
ability (e.g., Zvi Griliches and William
Mason 1972) and using siblings to control for family-level unobservables
(Gary Chamberlain 1977). More recently, it has been suggested that natu-

ral experiments that induce variation in
school attainment unrelated to ability
can be used to eliminate ability bias in
estimating the return to schooling.
These natural natural experiments include date of birth, as used in Joshua
Angrist and Alan Krueger (1991), and
child gender, as used in Kristin Butcher
and Anne Case (1994). In addition,
seven studies have used differences in
the schooling attainment of individuals
in monozygotic twin pairs—human
cloning—to eliminate the contamination of returns estimates from genetic
differences in ability. And one study
(Angrist 1990) has exploited the dateof-birth draft lottery during the Vietnam War to estimate the returns to
civilian work experience.
Table 1 summarizes the results from
these studies of the human capital determinants of earnings that exploit natural natural experiments. One interesting
feature of the set of studies is that only
one of the studies examines jointly the
returns to both work experience and
schooling. And, of the two studies providing estimates of experience returns,
one excludes schooling from the specification. As we discuss, these omissions
are not only (or at all in some cases)
due to data restrictions, but are related
importantly to the limitations of the
natural natural experiment approach.
What is also striking about the set of
natural natural-experiment schooling
returns estimates is that, not only do
they have an extraordinary range—from
less than one percent to over 18 percent—they also are almost exactly
evenly divided between those that indicate a negative ability bias (4) and those
that indicate a positive ability bias (6),
although in many cases the estimated
returns do not differ significantly when
the instrument is used. It is difficult to
infer from the pattern of estimates
across the studies the precise role of

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”

833

TABLE 1
ESTIMATES OF THE RETURNS TO SCHOOLING AND WORK EXPERIENCE USING NATURAL EVENTS AS INSTRUMENTS

Study

OLS
Return to
Schooling

Instrumented
Return to
Schooling

Instrumented
Return to
Work Exp.

“Control”
Variables

Natural Event

Data Set

Angrist 1990

Date of birth +
Vietnam draft
lottery

U.S. Social Security Administration Continuous
Work History Sample, for
men

—

—

.102–
.003∗years
of work
exp.

Angrist and
Krueger 1991

Date of birth +
school leaving
age + school
entry age

1970 and 1980 U.S. Censuses, men aged 41–50

.080
(1970)
.071
(1980)

.072
(1970)
.102
(1980)

—

Age,
race,
SMSA,
married

Butcher and
Case 1994

Gender (any
sisters)

Panel Study of Income
Dynamics, white women

.091

.184

—

Age

Behrman,
Hrubec,
Taubman, and
Wales 1980

Human cloning

U.S. NAS-NRC Twins
Sample of White Veteran
Males Born in 1917–27

.080

.003

—

Age

Ashenfelter
and Krueger
1994

Human cloning + instruments (report
by co-twin)

Twinsburg, Ohio Annual
Twins Festival Sample,
1991—men and women

.116a

.129

—

Age, tenure in
last job,
union,
married

Behrman,
Rosenzweig
and Taubman
1994

Human cloning + instruments (report
by twins’ oldest child)

Biographical Questionnaire sample from the
Minnesota Twin Registry,
twins born in Minnesota
1936–55—men

.101a

.050

—

Age

Miller, Mulvey
and Martin
1995

Human cloning + instruments (report
by co-twin)

Australian Twin Register
1980–2 and 1988–9

.073a

.045

—

Age, married

Ashenfelter
and Rouse
1998

Human cloning + instruments (report
by co-twin)

Twinsburg, Ohio Annual
Twins Festival Sample,
1991, 1993—men and
women

.113

.100

—

Age, tenure in
last job,
union,
married

Behrman and
Rosenzweig
1999

Human cloning + instruments (report
by co-twin)

1994 Minnesota Twin
Registry survey sample,
twins born in Minnesota
1936–55—men and
women

.113a

.104

.0084

Age, postschool
full-time
work experience

Rouse 1999

Human cloning + instruments (report
by co-twin)

Twinsburg, Ohio Annual
Twins Festival Samples,
1991–93, and 1995—men
and women

.111

.119

—

Age, tenure in
last job,
union,
married

a Estimate using same instruments to correct for measurement error in schooling as used in cloning-based estimates.

834

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

the different natural natural experiments exploited, as some use samples of
males only, one uses only females, and
some use a sample including both males
and females. However, as we show, an
important factor in explaining the differences in findings is the naturalexperiment based instrument used. One
reason, as shown in human capital models by David Card (1994) and James
Heckman (1997) and generalized in a
large literature concerned with evaluation (e.g., Guido Imbens and Angrist
1994), is that when there is heterogeneity in returns, the “treatment” effect
that is identified is for the group or
groups whose behavior is influenced by
the intervention. And the instruments
affect different groups.
To show how these natural experiments are used to estimate the returns
to human capital investments, the essence of the problem that is being
solved, some of the factors that lead to
differences among the estimates, and
the assumptions made implicitly by the
authors of the studies, we begin with a
standard model of schooling choice incorporating ability heterogeneity. We
assume that earnings at any age a, y a,
depends on three factors—the level of
school attainment, S; the amount of work
experience at age a, X a; and ability µ
—according to
lnya = f(S,µ) + g(Xa,µ),

(3)

where f and g are monotonically increasing in their arguments. We initially assume, as do all but two of the studies,
that all individuals work full-time after
completing schooling. Each individual
enters school at a mandated school entry
age a e and must remain in school until
the mandated minimum school leaving
age a κ. Thus, school attainment at a κ is
S 0 = a κ – a e. It will be convenient for what
follows to limit the decision horizon by
assuming that the individual decides on

whether to attend school only for one
period beyond the school leaving age.
School attendance in the period following a κ, period one, is denoted by s1 = 1
and nonattendance by s 1 = 0; completed
schooling, at the end of period one, S 1, is
therefore either S 0 + 1 or S 0. An individual who decides not to attend school in
period one works that period and all subsequent periods; i.e., the individual
works from period a = 1 to the end of
working life a = A, while an individual
who attends school does not work in that
period, but works in all subsequent periods, i.e., from a = 2 to A + 1. There is a
direct cost of attending school denoted
by c. In addition, the assumption that
school attendance precludes working implies that school attendance entails an
opportunity cost in terms of the earnings
that are foregone.
The individual is assumed to make
the choice of whether or not to attend
school according to which option maximizes the present discounted value of
lifetime earnings. Denoting the discount factor as β(= 1 1+ r ), the present
value of each alternative, V1(s1 = 1 | S0)
and V1(s1 = 0 | S0), is:
V1(s1 = 1 | S0) = exp[f(S0 + 1,µ)].
A−1

∑ βa + 1exp[g(a,µ)] − c,

a=0

V1(s1 = 0 | S0) = exp[f(S0,µ)].

(4)

A−1

∑ βaexp[g(a,µ)].

a=0

The decision rule is to attend school
if V1(s1 = 1 | S0) ≥ V1(s0 = 1 | S0), which
reduces, after some manipulation, to: 5
s1 = 1

if

f(S0 + 1,µ) − f(S0,µ)

s1 = 0

c


+ 1 ,
≥ r + ln
V
1(s1 = 0 | S 0)


otherwise.

(5)

5 We use the approximation ln(1 + r) ≈ r in deriving the decision rule.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
The individual attends school if the percentage increase in earnings from attending
school, the marginal return to schooling, is
sufficiently greater than the interest rate. 6
If ability increases the marginal schooling return,
∂[f(S0 + 1,µ) − f(S0,µ)]
> 0,
∂µ

then there exists a cut-off value of ability, µ∗ , such that individuals with ability
at or above that cut-off attend school and
those below it do not.7 Thus, the difference in earnings among the two schoolcompletion groups will reflect, in part,
these induced ability differences. Although ability is distributed randomly in
the population, optimizing behavior creates a positive correlation between ability and completed schooling, which implies that the (average) return to
schooling calculated from (ln) earnings
differences between the two schooling
groups (given experience) overstates the
(average) return to schooling, i.e.,
Eµ[f(S0 + 1,µ) | µ ≥ µ∗] − Eµ[f(S0,µ) | µ < µ∗]
> Eµ[f(S0 + 1,µ) − f(S0,µ)]. The challenge
is to obtain an estimate of the returns
to schooling without this “ability bias”
for every ability group in the population. Almost all of the empirical literature assumes that the return to schooling is identical for all ability groups, so
that there is one true return to schooling.
6 If the direct cost of attending school is small
relative to the present discounted value of lifetime
earnings, then the right hand side can be approximated by r + c / V 1(s1 = 0 | S 0). Regardless, if the
direct cost of schooling is zero, either condition
reduces to the marginal return to schooling exceeding the interest rate. With continuous schooling choices and zero direct cost, the rule for optimal schooling is to equate the marginal earnings
return to the rate of interest, i.e., fs = r. The second order condition would require in that case
that fSS < 0.
7 Notice that when c is non-zero, the right-hand
side is falling monotonically with ability. A cutoff ability level will exist, therefore, even if the
marginal return to schooling is independent of
ability.

835

3.1 The Returns to Schooling When
Schooling Is a Choice: The
Angrist-Krueger and Butcher-Case
Natural Experiments
3.1.1 Angrist and Krueger: Age at Birth
Angrist and Krueger (AK) suggest that
natural variation in dates of birth, in conjunction with the existence of a birth
date cut-off for school entry and a minimum compulsory school leaving age, can
be used as an “instrument” for completed schooling that provides an estimate of the returns to schooling without ability bias. This study exemplifies
well the difference between the natural
natural experiment approach and the
more prevalent natural experiment approach which often relies on variations
in government-determined laws or regulations. The AK study does not use the
variation in mandatory school leaving
ages across or within states or other administrative units as a source of identification. To illustrate the reasoning, consider a particular locality, defined by a
set of fixed school entering and schoolleaving ages, in which a child must attain the age of six as of September 1 in
order to enter the first grade and cannot
leave school prior to attaining the age of
sixteen. Then, a child whose birthday falls
on September 1 will have completed ten
years of schooling at the minimum school
leaving age. However, a child born in
the same calendar year but a day later,
on September 2, will enter the first
grade one year later and will have completed only nine years of schooling
upon reaching age sixteen. Thus, if children in the two (day of birth) cohorts
are otherwise identical and at least
some of them prefer nine or fewer years
of schooling, average completed schooling of the two cohorts will differ because some of the children in the September 1 cohort will have been forced to
obtain an additional year of schooling.

836

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

An additional simplification of the
model illuminates how the AK instrumental variable estimator works. Assume that there are just two ability
types, denoted as µ 1 and µ 2, with the
first type of higher ability. Type 1’s
comprise π 1 proportion of the population and type 2’s 1 − π 1. The insight of
AK is that, given laws governing the
ages at which children can enter and
leave school, completed schooling will
vary with birth date for some part of the
population. Date of birth is assumed by
AK to be a random variable uncorrelated with ability (as transmitted intergenerationally), while the laws governing school-entering and leaving ages,
set by each state, can be correlated with
other state-specific unobservables that
influence earnings. 8 These are subsumed in a state fixed-effect. Thus,
variation in state schooling laws are not
treated as natural experiments, can be
endogenously determined, and do not
contribute to identification. It is variation in date of birth within states that
serves to identify schooling effects. Having information on multiple states, with
differing laws, merely adds precision to
the estimates.
AK present Wald estimates of the return to schooling based on comparing
(ln) weekly earnings and school completion levels for two cohorts of men aged
41–50 who differed in their quarter of
birth, specifically comparing those born
in the first quarter of a calendar year to
those born in the other three quarters
(of the previous calendar year). In
terms of the model, it is easy to show
what their Wald estimator identifies.
8 John Bound and David Jaeger (1996) present
evidence that date of birth is correlated with a
number of attributes of children that might be directly related to their later earnings net of schooling effects, including personality, mental health,
and parental income. They do not provide any behavioral model that suggests why these correlations exist.

Suppose, according to (5), that the optimal level of schooling for type 1’s is
S 0 + 1 and that for type 2’s is exactly S 0,
given the school entry age a e and the
minimum school leaving age a κ. Consider reducing the age at entry by one
year, leaving the minimum school leaving age unchanged. In that case, both
ability types will complete S 0 + 1 years
of schooling; type 1’s do so because it is
optimal, while type 2’s are forced to remain in school an extra year. The difference in expected (ln) incomes associated with the alternative school entry
ages divided by the corresponding difference in expected schooling levels,
that is, the Wald estimator, is f(S 0 + 1,
µ 2) − f(S 0,µ 2), which is the marginal
return to schooling of the less able type.
AK found that for the group of men
aged 41–50 in 1970 (1980), those born
in the first quarter of a calendar year
obtained .1256 (.1088) fewer years of
schooling on average than those born in
the other quarters. Presumably, those
men born in the first quarter of a calendar year were more likely to have had to
delay school entry than those born in
the previous three quarters. Dividing
those differences by the concomitant
differences in (ln) weekly wages implied a return to schooling of .0715 in
1970 and of .1020 in 1980. In contrast,
the OLS estimate was larger in 1970,
.0801, and smaller in 1980, .0709. 9
3.1.2 Butcher and Case: Child Gender
as a Schooling Instrument and the
Quality–Quantity Tradeoff
Butcher and Case (BC) suggest that
natural variation in the sex of siblings,
in particular whether a girl has any sisters, can be used to obtain an estimate
of the schooling return (to women) that
is free of ability-bias. They discuss
9 Two-stage least squares estimates that control
for age trends tend to provide estimates that are
also close to the OLS estimates.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
several reasons for the gender of siblings to affect parental human capital
investments in a given child. In particular, the gender of siblings may affect
the cost of investing in a child’s human
capital through the existence of borrowing constraints if there are exogenous
gender differences in the return to human capital. According to BC, in the
presence of borrowing constraints and
assuming that boys receive a higher return to each level of schooling, “we
should expect to see not only that boys
receive more education, but also that
the presence of sons reduces the educational attainment of daughters.” Also,
independent of preferences, there may
be exogenous differences in the cost of
raising girls relative to boys, thus affecting the household’s overall budget constraint. In addition, they argue that the
gender of one’s siblings may affect a
child’s preferences for schooling investments, with girls who have brothers
perhaps adopting “masculine” traits and
vice-versa. Finally, parents may simply
prefer to invest differentially in girls
and boys depending on the overall
gender composition of their children.
BC provide evidence from three different data sources, the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID), the Current
Population Survey (CPS), and the National Longitudinal Surveys Mature
Women’s cohort (NLSMW), in support
of the hypothesis that gender composition affects human capital investments
in children. Specifically, they find that
girls who have any sisters, conditional
on the number of siblings, have lower
school attainment than do girls with no
sisters. 10 Given this result coupled with
the inherent randomness of child gender, BC argue that the existence of any
sisters can serve as a valid instrument
10 On the other hand, the school attainment of
boys is found to be unrelated to gender composition.

837

for school attainment in estimating the
earnings return to schooling.
BC recognize, however, that the existence of sisters, even if gender is randomly determined, depends on the choice
of family size. There are economic models in the literature that suggest that this
choice may be correlated with ability.
Although the gender of any particular
child is random, the probability of having a sister obviously increases with the
number of siblings. Assuming fertility is
subject to control, to the extent that
fertility is related to the ability of children, the “any sisters” instrument will
be invalid, and inclusion of number of
siblings as a regressor to control for this
relationship requires an assumption
that parents are indifferent about the
sex-composition of their children. One
such behavioral mechanism creating a
correlation between the immutable
component of the abilities of children
and number of siblings arises in the context of the joint fertility-child investment
decision models first proposed by Gary
Becker and H. Gregg Lewis (1973) and
elaborated by Becker and Nigel Tomes
(1976) to include heritable endowments
of parents and children.
In these models, which highlight the
trade-offs between the “quality” and
quantity of children, parents receive
utility from the number of children they
have (fertility) and from the average
quality of their children. Child quality
is produced through the application of
parental (time and goods) inputs conditional on parental (innate and heritable)
ability. Parents with higher ability for
given inputs are assumed to be able to
produce higher quality children. The
essence of the quality–quantity model is
that the cost of children depends on total child quality (the price per unit
quality times quality per child times
fertility), which implies that the shadow
price of fertility is increasing in the

838

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

average quality of children. An implication of this model is that parents with
higher ability will tend to have fewer
children that are of higher quality. 11
Given the heritability of parental ability, family size and child ability will
thus be negatively related.
One of the earliest uses of the birth
twinning natural experiment (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1980a) was for the
purpose of testing the quality–quantity
framework. In that study, data on households from rural India were used to assess whether an exogenous increase in
the number of children, brought about by
a twin birth, led to reduced schooling
attainment for children. Explicit attention was paid to the fact that like the
“any sisters” variable, having a twin birth
is positively correlated with the propensity to have a large family by dividing
the number of twin births by the total
number of pregnancies. This measure
of “extra” births clearly does not completely conform to the randomness criterion if family size is a choice variable
and led to the subsequent use of having
a twin on the first birth as a natural
natural instrument, described below.
BC, recognizing the existence of a relationship between family size and having a sister, also incorporate family size
in their instrumental variables estimation procedure. They note, however,
that sex-composition may still not be
random if fertility is chosen in a sequential decision process. In particular,
if parents have a preference for mixedgender families then among parents who
have the same completed family size,
11 The effect of higher ability on the level of
child investments is ambiguous and depends on
how ability affects the marginal product of inputs.
The higher income of higher ability parents will
also tend to reduce fertility if, as was posited by
Becker and Lewis, the income elasticity of quality
exceeds that of quantity. For a life-cycle model
with the same implications see Rosenzweig and
Wolpin (1980b).

those with same-sex children will differ
from those with mixed-gender in some
characteristic that leads to having fewer
children, e.g., lower income. BC provide
as evidence that the “any sister” instrument is not contaminated by fertility selection that, for two-child families, boys
with a brother have no less education
than boys with a sister even though girls
with a sister have less education than do
girls with a brother. Although this evidence clearly shows that boys and girls
are treated differently, in the absence
of a priori knowledge of how they are
treated differently, it does not refute
the possibility that parents prefer mixed
genders. Indeed, Angrist and Evans
(1998), as described below, present direct evidence that parents do prefer
mixed-gender families, which they use
as the basis for the identification of
fertility effects on labor supply.
BC employ two specifications in estimating the returns to schooling using
instrumental variables. In one specification, BC include the number of siblings
as a determinant of both earnings and
schooling. The validity of this estimator
rests on the assumption that parents are
indifferent about gender composition.
In a second specification, they omit
number of siblings from the earnings
function but still include it as a determinant of schooling, thus using the
number of siblings as an additional instrument. Clearly, if number of siblings
is related to a child’s innate ability, as
theory suggests, this specification will
not provide a consistent estimate of the
schooling return. 12 The distribution of
the total number of children across
households is not the outcome of a
natural natural experiment.
For the BC instrument “any sisters”
12 The estimate of the schooling coefficient is
only statistically significantly different from zero
in the specification that uses family size as an additional identifying instrument.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
to be valid it is thus sufficient that fertility not be correlated with ability, that
the models of fertility choice are incorrect in some way. For example, parents
may not know their children’s ability
prior to making their fertility decisions.
Without a measure of innate ability, it
is of course not possible to demonstrate
conclusively the existence of a correlation of ability with number of siblings
(or having sisters). Indeed, if a test that
perfectly measured innate ability were
available, obtaining an unbiased estimate of the return to schooling would
not be a problem in the first place. We
can provide evidence, however, on
whether having sisters is correlated with
scores from tests administered to very
young children that are designed to
measure ability, recognizing that such
measures are unlikely to be themselves
immutable and that such a correlation
might exist as a result of parental investment behavior. For this purpose,
we make use of the “ability” measures
present in the 1979 Youth and Child
cohorts from the NLS. 13
We restrict the sample to the firstborn children of women in the NLSY
who had a first birth by the age of 29.
The gender of firstborn children, absent sex-selective abortion, meets the
randomness criterion for all households
with any children. The sample consists
of 2311 first births for whom there is a
valid score on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) and for whose
mothers there is a valid score on the
Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT).
The PPVT is for children aged three to
six and is designed to measure verbal
13 Note that while there is some empirical evidence calling into question the randomness of month
of birth (Bound and Jaeger 1996), no behavioral
model has been presented as to why ability and
intra-annual birth timing should be correlated.
The randomness of fertility with respect to parental
ability is called into question by well-established
economic models, but there is limited evidence.

839

ability. The AFQT has been shown to
be highly correlated with IQ-type tests.
A necessary condition for this exercise
to be minimally credible is that the gender of the firstborn not be correlated
with either the firstborn child’s nor the
mother’s test score. The first and third
columns of Table 2 provide evidence
consistent with that condition; the OLS
coefficient from a regression of the
firstborn child’s PPVT score and the
mother’s AFQT score on the gender of
the firstborn child (being a female) is
neither statistically significant nor large
in magnitude. 14 The data confirm that
the gender of the first child satisfies the
condition of randomness.
The second and fourth columns of
Table 2 provide evidence based on the
same data, however, that calls into
question the implicit behavioral assumptions that would render the BC
“any sisters” instrument as valid. Restricting attention to the 1135 firstborn
children who were female, we regressed
the child’s PPVT score and the mother’s
AFQT score on whether that child had
any sisters. In contrast to the correlations with respect to the gender of the
firstborn, it appears that the child’s
PPVT score and the mother’s AFQT
score are both negatively related to
whether the firstborn female child has
any sisters. Further, as seen in column
five, the mothers of female children
with more children have lower AFQT
scores. These results together are consistent with the notion that the less
“able” mothers have more children (as
is demonstrated in column five) and
that their lower “ability” is transmitted
to their offspring. 15
14 The mean PPVT score for the sample is 90
with a standard deviation of 20. Similarly, the mean
AFQT score is 611 with a standard deviation of 215.
15 All of the results in Table 2 are the same for
boys. These results are available from the authors
upon request.

840

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)
TABLE 2
GENDER, SIBLING GENDER, AND “ABILITY” TEST SCORES OF CHILDREN AND THEIR MOTHERS
(MOTHERS AGED 29+ IN 1992 FROM THE NLSY79)
Firstborn’s PPVT Score
All mothers

Mothers with
firstborn girl

Mother’s AFQT Score
All mothers

Mothers with
firstborn girl

All mothers

–.462
(0.580)a

—

–6.44
(8.26)

—

—

Firstborn has a sister

—

–2.83
(1.11)

—

–31.4
(11.8)

—

Children ever born
to mother

—

—

—

—

–25.9
(3.89)

Mother is Black

–16.3
(0.953)

–16.7
(1.33)

–175
(9.90)

–171
(14.1)

–172
(9.82)

Mother is Hispanic

–13.2
(1.11)

–13.8
(1.51)

–152
(11.5)

–145
(16.1)

–147
(11.5)

R2

.133

.155

.147

.148

.162

N

2,311

1,135

2,311

1,135

2,311

Firstborn is a girl

a Standard

errors in parentheses.

The problem that the any-sisters instrument is correlated with “ability” via
fertility stems from the fact that the instrument incorporates information on
the gender of births subsequent to the
first. Recognizing the source of the
problem suggests that a remedy would
be to use as an instrument the gender
of the first birth, which our results
show conforms to the randomness criterion. 16 Thus, assuming that all women
have at least two births, the gender of
the first birth can be used as a valid instrument for the schooling of the second child. 17 In particular, the gender of
16 The same remedy, as will be shown, applies to
the “twins” instrument used by Rosenzweig and
Wolpin (1980a). We show below that this instrument has some limited power to explain schooling
variation for siblings.
17 Of course, sample selection based on having
at least two births, given that fertility is a choice,
may be a source of bias. Angrist and William
Evans’ (1998) natural natural experiment estimate
of the effects of fertility on labor supply also must
assume that the two-birth minimum does not result in a choice-based sample.

the first child cannot be correlated with
the innate ability of the second child,
but would be correlated with the
schooling of the second child through
the avenues discussed by BC.
To illustrate the Wald estimator of
the return to schooling based on the
gender of the first birth instrumental
variable, in the context of the model
used to elucidate the AC experiment,
we incorporate the BC assumption that
the cost of schooling to a second-born
girl is higher if the first born is a boy as
opposed to a girl, specifically c b and c g
respectively with c b > c g. We also adopt
the assumption that ability is independent of sex. Now, suppose that with
these costs, it is optimal for the girl
with a firstborn brother not to attend
school regardless of her ability, so that
she completes only the minimum, S 0,
years of schooling. On the other hand,
suppose that among girls with a firstborn sister, who face a lower cost of
schooling, type 1’s optimally choose to

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
attend school, thus completing S 0 + 1
years, while the type 2’s still do not attend. In this case, the difference in
expected (ln) incomes of girls with
firstborn sisters vs. firstborn brothers
(experience constant) divided by the
difference in their expected schooling
levels, that is, the Wald estimator, is
simply f(S 0 + 1,µ 1) − f(S 0,µ 1), the return
to schooling for the more able group.
Thus the variation in completed schooling that arises from the sex of the first
born sibling, variation that is independent of ability, provides identification
of the schooling return, but only for the
more able group.
3.1.3 Specification Matters: Schooling,
Age and Experience
We have shown in one model that the
AK and BC (suitably modified) natural
experiments yield estimates of returns
to schooling for different ability groups
in the population, exemplifying that the
instrumental approach identifies treatment effects only for the treated. Other
models may yield different results for
each instrument when ability and schooling returns are correlated. Again, the
interpretation of what has been estimated and for whom depends on how one
models behavior. If the schooling return is independent of ability, however,
in principle the two experiments yield
the same estimate of the schooling return in (3). But AK and BC do not estimate equation (3). Both the BC and AK
specifications of the earnings function
control for age rather than for work experience. Our model suggests that this
seemingly innocuous specification choice
leads to bias in both the AK and BC
estimates and, perhaps surprisingly, the
biases are of opposite sign. The existence
of a theoretically valid natural instrument thus does not mean that the specification of the equation of interest does
not matter for identification. That is,

841

bias can still arise due to misspecification.
Suppose that, as suggested in Jacob
Mincer (1974), time spent in the labor
force after completing schooling—postschool work experience—is the appropriate proxy for post-school human
capital investments, as in (3). As Mincer
first demonstrated, in this case controlling for age rather than experience will
understate the return to an additional
year of schooling by the earnings loss
associated with having one less year of
experience. Under the assumption that
all post-schooling periods are spent at
work, the assumption used in the
schooling choice model, experience at
any age X a in equation (3) is simply a −
S − a e. It is easily seen that the Wald
estimator for the BC experiment is
given by [f(S0 + 1,µ1) − f(S0,µ1)] − [g(a −
aκ − 1,µ1) − g(a − aκ,µ1)]. Because the additional year of schooling comes at the
expense of an additional year of experience, the consequence of omitting experience from the BC specification is
exactly as Mincer showed—what is
identified is the difference between the
returns to schooling and experience (for
the more able group).
In contrast, the Wald estimator based
on the quarter-of-birth experiment of
AK overstates the schooling return
when age is used to proxy experience.
The reason is that this experimental
treatment is based on an exogenous delay in schooling, and school delay not
only affects schooling attainment, but
must also affect post-school experience
for members of the same year-of-birth
cohort. To see this, we rewrite the expected (ln) earnings at age a for the
population with two ability types, where
we do not control for work experience,
with school entry age a e and minimum
school leaving age a κ :
E(lnya) = π1[f(S0 + 1,µ1) + g(a − aκ − 1,µ1)]
+ (1 − π1)[f(S0,µ2) + g(a − aκ,µ2)]. (6)

842

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

Type 1’s attend school an extra year and
so have one year less of accumulated work
experience at age a. Under the alternative
scenario with the school entry age reduced by one year, type 1’s achieve their
optimal level of schooling exactly at the
school leaving age, rather than one year
later, and thus have accumulated one more
year of work experience, a − a κ years, at
age a. Type 2’s, as before, will be forced
to obtain one year of schooling beyond
their optimal level, will leave school at a κ
and will have accumulated a − a κ years of
work experience at age a. Expected (ln)
earnings under this scenario are thus
E(lnya) = π1[f(S0 + 1,µ1) + g(a − aκ,µ1)]
+ (1 − π1)[f(S0 + 1,µ2) + g(a − aκ,µ2)].

(7)

The difference in expected (ln) earnings divided by the difference in expected schooling (0 ⋅ π1 + 1 ⋅ (1 − π1) = 1 −
π1), the Wald estimator, is thus
π1
∆E(lnya)
=
[g(a − aκ,µ1) − g(a
∆S
1 − π1
− aκ − 1,µ1)] + [f(S0 + 1,µ2) − f(S0,µ2)].

(8)

Compared to the experience-constant
Wald estimator, the return to schooling
is overstated by the return to an additional year of experience weighted by the
type one odds ratio in the population. Although reducing the age at entry forces
type 2’s to obtain an additional year of
schooling, an additional consequence is that
type 1’s gain a year of work experience.
3.2 The Returns to Civilian Work
Experience: The Angrist Natural
Lottery Experiment
Obtaining additional schooling is not
the only factor reducing “Mincer” experience for members of the same birth
cohort, if that definition is restricted to
civilian labor force experience. One
component of the cost of military service to an individual is the loss in lifetime earnings that is incurred that

arises in part by reducing time in the
civilian labor force, given that the two
forms of experience are imperfect substitutes. Measuring the loss from military service is complicated by the fact
that those who enter military service
are not usually randomly selected. Even
in a regime of military conscription
draftees are not necessarily random
with respect to traits that are related to
earnings because some individuals
choose voluntarily to enter military service and some individuals are exempted. Angrist (1990) uses the theoretical natural randomness of the
Vietnam War draft lottery, based on
birth dates, to assess both the total
costs of military experience on earnings
and to estimate the returns to civilian
experience. Angrist exploits the fact
that the draft lottery randomly assigns
the pool of those eligible for the draft. 18
The suitability of the draft lottery as
an instrument requires that a random
process choose who serves and, equally,
who does not. However, although the
draft lottery randomly chose who must
enter military service, subject to some
qualifying criteria, some who were not
draft-eligible as determined by the lottery entered the military. There were
no barriers to volunteer one’s service
even if not chosen, and some incentives
to volunteer prior to knowing whether
one would be drafted (e.g., choice of
service). This “unnatural” military draft
lottery thus does not strictly conform to
the randomness criteria and, as Heckman (1997) has pointed out, if those
who enter the military voluntarily do so
in anticipation of high earnings gains
from military service or have traits that
18 The randomness of the draft lottery was also
exploited in articles in the biomedical literature
to estimate the effects of military service on postservice mortality (N. Hearst, T. B. Newman, and
S. B. Hulley 1986) and IV drug use (Hearst, J. W.
Buehler, Newman, and G. W. Rutherford 1991) (a
true IV estimator).

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
are related to unobservables that affect
earnings, then the lottery cannot strictly
serve as a valid instrument for military
service. Throughout our discussion, we
will assume this problem away, as does
Angrist. Even if the draft lottery were a
valid instrument, its use to identify the
returns to civilian experience requires
still more assumptions about behavior.
Angrist obtains an estimate of the impact of military service on earnings
using a Wald estimator given by [y−e − y−n]/
^n], where y−e is mean earnings
^e − p
[p
of draft eligibles, y−n mean earnings of
^e the proportion of
draft ineligibles, p
draft eligibles who enter the military
^n the proportion of ineligibles who
and p
enter the military (voluntarily). The Wald
estimates (over different birth cohorts)
imply that military service reduced annual earnings of Vietnam War veterans
by 15 percent. Conditional on the draft
lottery randomly assigning individuals
to the military, the gross earnings impact (gross of all other investments
influenced by being draft-eligible) of
military service is thus identified.
To quantify the importance of the
earnings loss from the reduction in civilian experience, Angrist uses the same
instrumental variables approach. Unlike
in the later AK study, however, he
adopts the Mincer earnings specification in which post-school years of experience, and not age, matter for earnings, modified such that potential
experience is net of time spent in the
military service, m. Because Angrist
uses Social Security-based data that
does not provide schooling, the earnings function for an individual at age a
who spends time m in the military is
written as:
lnya = α0 + α1Sa + α2Xa + ua
= α′0 + α2(a − m) + u′a,

(9)

where the second line is obtained by
substituting for potential civilian experi-

843

ence, Xa = a − S a − m − a e, and where the
composite error contains both the unobserved earnings endowment and the
omitted schooling variable, u′a = (α 1 −
α 2)S a + u a. 19
As seen in (9), if military service is
correlated with unobservables that affect earnings (the composite error),
then an OLS estimator of the return to
civilian experience will be biased. Now,
the original motivation for using draft
eligibility derived from the lottery as an
instrument for military service was that
m and (some permanent component of)
u, ability, might be correlated. However, given the non-observability of
schooling in the data set used, in order
to get a valid estimate of the experience
return, it is also necessary to assume
that the variation in military service induced by the lottery system is uncorrelated with completed schooling. Angrist
notes that such a correlation might exist
because eligibility for G.I. benefits
would increase the schooling of veterans relative to nonveterans. This correlation would lead to an understatement
of the return to civilian experience if
the return to schooling exceeds the return to experience, i.e., α 1 − α 2 > 0. 20
Alternatively, as Angrist notes, one can
interpret the Wald estimator as a composite of the effect of military service
on experience and schooling.
However, Angrist ignores the possibility that schooling and ability may be
correlated due to the fact that there is
another effect of military service on
completed schooling that arises from
the interruption of schooling (for those
19 For simplicity, the quadratic in potential experience is ignored. Angrist’s specification differs
slightly as well in that the length of military service, conditional on service, is estimated as a separate parameter.
20 In this case, where veterans obtain more
schooling than nonveterans, a − m and S are negatively correlated and S increases earnings, conditional on a − m.

844

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

who had not completed their schooling). The effect is analogous to the effect of a delay in school entry associated
with the AK natural experiment. 21 Suppose in the model of school choice we
presented a e is redefined not as the age
of school entry but as the age at which
military service is completed, for those
who were inducted. Assume that all individuals had completed S 0 years of
schooling at the time of induction, say
at age a e − 1, and that it was optimal for
those not inducted to have completed
an additional year of schooling regardless of their ability by age a e. Thus,
those who actually served in the military have one less year of schooling at a e
than those who had not served. Now,
given either a finite schooling or age
horizon, as in the model presented in
the previous section, those who experienced the (exogenous) interruption due
to military service will optimally obtain
less schooling overall. Moreover, regardless of military service, completed
schooling will be higher for the more
able and therefore the more able will
always have less civilian work experience. 22 This means that unless the
schooling subsidy in the form of the
G.I. Bill offset these factors the Wald
estimator cannot be interpreted as a
composite of experience and schooling
effects; that composite effect is biased
upward because of the schooling-ability
correlation. The single draft-lottery in21 The lottery experiment differs from the school
entry age experiment in that there is no analog to
the mandatory minimum school leaving age.
22 The condition for obtaining an additional year
of schooling for those who served in the military is
given by (5). Individuals who did not serve choose
between having S 0 + 1 and S 0 + 2 years of schooling. If the marginal return to an additional year of
schooling is increasing in ability, one would expect
that at least the more able among those who did
not serve will obtain the additional year. One
would also expect that a greater proportion of
those who served would obtain the additional year
if f(S) is concave.

strument cannot be used to identify the
returns to experience when both schooling and military service are correlated
with ability, as in this very simple
model, and schooling is unobserved.
3.3 Estimating the Returns to Schooling
When Work Experience Is a Choice
The AK, BC, and Angrist studies assume that individuals work “full-time”
after completing school or military experience. Given this assumption, consistent estimates of the schooling return
can be obtained based on the first-birth
gender instrumental variable or the
quarter of birth instrumental variable
when schooling is a choice and that
choice is influenced by an unobservable, as depicted by the simple model,
holding Mincer work experience X a
constant. 23 However, suppose that individuals, after leaving school, make labor
supply decisions. Would the Wald estimators proposed by BC and AK, or suitably modified estimators that account
for actual work experience, consistently
estimate the schooling return? If not,
how will that affect the estimates of the
schooling returns for the instruments
used? Note that the issue of post-school
work choice is not relevant for methods
that attempt to directly control for unmeasured ability using test scores or
fixed-effects.
Before turning to these issues, it is
useful to consider the empirical plausibility of the post-schooling “full-time”
work assumption. Table 3, based on the
1979 National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY79), depicts the amount of
accumulated work experience, separately for men and women, over the
ten-year period from age 25 through 34
23 The differential effect of military experience
on earnings found by Angrist appears to have been
ignored in the subsequent AK study. The 1990
Census indicates that in the male cohorts studied
in AK, over 30 percent were veterans.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
TABLE 3
MEAN ACCUMULATED HOURS OF WORK
BETWEEN THE AGES OF 25 AND 34, BY
SCHOOL ATTAINMENT AND SEXa
(WEIGHTED NLSY79)
Males

Females

HS dropout

15,741
(11,645)

6,793
(9,446)

HS graduate

18,971
(10,993)

11,892
(10,202)

Some college

18,164
(10,797)

13,929
(8,789)

College graduate

19,908
(7,662)

15,958
(7,127)

a Standard

deviation in parentheses.

for four levels of completed schooling. 24
For men, the largest difference in accumulated work experience is between
high school dropouts and all others.
Specifically, high school graduates accumulated 3,000 more hours of work
over the period than dropouts; dropouts
accumulated on average about 1600
hours per year. Males with some college
actually accumulated 800 fewer hours
of work experience than high school
graduates, while those with college degrees accumulated 1,000 more hours
than high school graduates. For females, accumulated work experience increases monotonically with school completion levels. High school graduates
accumulated over 4,000 more hours
than high school dropouts (who averaged only about 700 hours per year over
the period), those with some college
2,000 more than high school graduates
and those with college degrees 2,000
more than those with some college. The
evidence suggests that the full-time
work assumption is certainly not universally valid and that there is systematic
24 To maintain a large enough sample, the final
age is the last age, between 32 and 34, that we
observe the individual.

845

variation in work intensity among
schooling groups.
To illustrate the consequences of introducing a labor supply decision for estimates of the schooling return based
on the BC and AK natural experiments,
consider an extension of the schooling
model as presented above that allows
for a work participation decision in each
post-schooling period. For simplicity,
assume that utility is additively separable in income (= consumption) and the
monetary-equivalent value of leisure
(home production) and that the individual maximizes the present value of lifetime utility. In each period the individual receives a wage offer that depends
on schooling, experience, and ability as
before, and additionally depends on a
period-specific shock that is iid over periods, i.e., lnya = f(S,µ) + g(Xa,µ) + εa, The
value of leisure, b(S,Xa,µ), may also depend on schooling, experience, and
ability, but, for simplicity, is assumed to
be deterministic.
In the terminal period, age A, the individual will work, pA = 1, if the current
wage offer exceeds the current value of
leisure. That decision thus depends on
whether the wage shock is larger than
some cut-off value that itself depends
on the individual’s schooling, experience,
and ability, namely,
pA = 1 iff εA > ε∗A(S,XA,µ)
= 0 otherwise,

(10)

where ε∗A(S,XA,µ) = ln[b(S,XA,µ)] − f(S,µ) −
g(XA,µ). Clearly, the effects of schooling,
work experience and ability on the propensity to work will depend on their
relative effects on the value of leisure
and on wage offers. For concreteness,
suppose that neither schooling nor work
experience affects the value of leisure,
but that ability increases the value of leisure. In that case increasing schooling or
experience will increase the propensity to
work at age A. However, ability may either

846

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

increase or decrease the propensity to
work (given schooling and experience).
The participation decision in period
A – 1 depends on a comparison of the
expected present values of working and
not working, namely,
VA − 1(pA − 1 = 1 | Ω A − 1) = exp[f(S,µ)
+ g(XA − 1,µ) + εA − 1]
+ δEmax[yA(S,XA − 1 + 1,µ,εA),b(µ)]
VA − 1(pA − 1 = 0 | Ω A − 1) = b(µ)
+ δEmax[yA(S,XA − 1,µ,εA),b(µ)],

(11)

where Ω A – 1, the state space at A – 1,
consists of the elements of S, XA – 1,µ,
and εA – 1, and where the expectation is
taken over the wage shock at A. The
decision rule, as in the last period, is to
work if the wage draw at A – 1 is larger
than a cut-off value that depends on the
non-stochastic elements of the state
space at A – 1, that is,
pA − 1 = 1 iff εA − 1 > εA∗ − 1(S,XA − 1,µ)
(12)
= 0 otherwise.

The extent to which the AK and BC
natural-experiment instrumental estimates provide consistent estimates of
schooling returns depends on whether
participation and schooling are uncorrelated, on whether schooling attainment
affects participation choices beyond the
mechanical effect on Mincer-type experience. It is clear that as long as the
wage offer is monotonically increasing
in S, the cut-off value of the wage shock
is declining in completed schooling. Because an increase in S increases the current wage, the future wage, and the
propensity to work in the future, an increase in S also increases the propensity
to work in the current period. Unlike
the effect of schooling, an increase in
the effect of ability on the propensity to
work is ambiguous; however, if ability
increases the (positive) effect of experience on wages, the propensity to work
will be more likely to increase with abil-

ity in period A – 1 than in period A. 25 If
we continue to solve backwards, by induction the effect of schooling on the
propensity to work will be positive at all
ages. Thus, because experience at any age
is simply the cumulation of past participation decisions, the deficit in work experience of the more schooled that results from their delayed entry into the
labor market will diminish once they do
enter and continue to diminish with
age. And, it is possible that work experience of the more schooled may exceed
that of the less schooled after some age,
as is consistent with the data in Table 3.
One effect of this endogenous accumulation pattern is to make the bias in
the BC and AK instrumental variables
estimators that control for age but not
for actual work experience depend on
the age at which wages are measured. To
see that, consider our previous example
of the AK experiment with two ability
types. It is easy to show that the Wald
estimator based on the difference in
earnings at age a for the population with
entry age a e − 1 vs. the population with
entry age a e (assuming that everybody
works at age a) is:
π1
∆E(lnya)
=
{g[Xa(S0 + 1,a
∆S
1 − π1
− aκ,µ1,εa − 1),µ1] − g[Xa(S0 + 1,a
− aκ − 1,µ1,εa − 1),µ1]}
+ {g[Xa(S0 + 1,a − aκ,µ2,εa − 1),µ2]
− g[Xa(S0,a − aκ,µ2,εa − 1),µ2]}
+ [f(S0 + 1,µ2) − f(S0,µ2)],

(13)

where εa–1 represents the vector of wage
shocks through age a – 1, all of which are
known at a. The first term reflects the
fact that the more able, and thus more
25 The effect of an increase in experience is
more complicated. Even if the wage is monotonically increasing in experience the effect on participation of an increase in experience depends on the
second derivative of the g function. Because of the
finite horizon, for given experience the propensity
to work is lower at A – 1 than at A.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
schooled, have one more year of potential experience when they are permitted
to enter school a year earlier. It is the
same term as in the model imposing the
exogenous full-time work assumption.
The second term reflects the fact that
when the less able are forced to attend
school for an additional year, they now
have the option of choosing a different
sequence of participation. The simple
model of participation presented above
implies that they will be more likely to
participate at each age, and that the difference in work experience will be negative at early ages and possibly positive at
later ages. Thus, the magnitude and even
the direction of the bias in the Wald estimator will be age-dependent. Notice that
controlling for potential (Mincer) experience rather than age as in AK when participation is a choice corrects for the bias
associated with the first term to the extent that an additional year of potential
experience leads to an additional year of
actual experience. Replacing age by potential experience cannot correct for the
bias from the second term because the
second term only arises because potential
and actual experience differ.
Replacing age by actual work experience also does not eliminate the bias in
the natural natural experiment-based
Wald estimator of the estimated return to
schooling (the third term in (9)) if participation decisions are dependent on
ability, as suggested in the model. It is
possible to develop a test for the endogeneity of experience using the BC and/or
AK natural experiments based on linearized versions of the decision rules from
the model. Specifically, consider the
statistical framework that corresponds
to the AK experiment (where all equations are in deviation from mean form):
lnya = α1S + α2Xa + µ + εa,
S = β1ae(q) + β2µ + εs,
X a = γ1 S + γ2 µ + εx ,

(14)

847

where q is quarter of birth. Notice first
that as long as γ2 is not zero, the return
to schooling is not identified; there is essentially one instrument, the age of
school entry (which is not related to ability) and two endogenous variables,
schooling and experience. Although we
cannot identify the earnings function parameters in (10), it is still possible to test
whether experience is correlated with
ability (assuming that schooling is correlated with ability), that is, whether γ2 is
zero, using a modified Wu-Hausman
test. First, note that estimating the
schooling equation provides a consistent
estimate of β 1. Next, form the residuals
from the estimated schooling equation,
S−^
S, which must be correlated with
ability under the maintained assumption
that β 2 is not zero. Finally, estimate the
experience equation, including S and
S−^
S. If the coefficient on the residuals
is non-zero, then γ2 must be non-zero.
An analogous set of equations substituting
a firstborn sex dummy for age of school
entry describes the BC experiment.
Table 4 presents regression estimates
of the p-values for the coefficient on
the schooling residual for men and for
women using data from the NLSY79.
Experience is defined as actual total
hours worked from age 18 until the last
year the individual is observed in the
data (for all individuals observed at least
through age 25). The first column for
each sex presents the estimates using
the AK instrument, quarter of birth interactions with state of birth. The second
column presents estimates using the
modified BC instrument, the sex of the
firstborn sibling and the third column
presents estimates based on using the
two instruments together. The results
indicate that for males the exogeneity of
experience is rejected based on either
the AK or the BC instrumental variables, but not on the combination of the
two sets of instruments. For females,

848

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)
TABLE 4
TESTS OF THE ENDOGENEITY OF WORK EXPERIENCE USING NATURAL NATURAL INSTRUMENTS
(NLSY79)
Males
AKa

BCb

P-value of schooling
residual coefficient

.008

.031

No. of observations

2,592

First-stage R2

.161

Females
AKa

BCb

AK + BCc

.277

.666

.733

.097

1,250

1,245

2,793

1,341

1,336

.172

.271

.120

.110

.187

AK +

BCc

a Instrumental variables are quarter of birth interactions with state of birth. Additional regressors are state of birth,
state of residence at age 14, a black dummy, a Hispanic dummy and age.
b Instrumental variable is sex of firstborn sibling. Additional regressors as above.
c Instrumental variables are quarters of birth interactions with state of birth and sex of firstborn sibling. Additional
regressors as above.

however, the exogeneity of experience
is rejected only with the combined set
of instruments. Although the lack of robustness of these results to the choice of
instruments does not lead us to a firm
conclusion, the results are certainly not
inconsistent with the hypothesis that
work intensity, for both males and females, is subject to choice. 26 In sum, in
a world in which schooling and work
choices are made optimally by individuals heterogeneous in ability, as characterized even in a very simple model and
for which there is some evidence, neither the AK nor the BC natural natural
instrument as implemented identifies the
returns to schooling. And the model suggests that the estimates obtained using
the different instruments but on the
same sample will result in different estimates of schooling returns if such returns vary by ability and, even if not,
because of the use of age as a proxy for
work experience. Due to the latter, the
estimates will further differ if there are
age differences in the samples used.
26 One of the reasons for the difference in results may be the fact that the date of birth of a
child does not strictly conform to the criterion of
randomness, as noted.

3.4 The Returns to Schooling and Work
Experience When Both Are Choices:
The Natural Human Cloning
Experiment
The natural natural experiment approach exemplified by Angrist, AK, and
BC exploited random events occurring
in nature that affect schooling or (military) experience decisions but are unrelated to ability. The use of these natural
natural experiments is an attempt to
mimic the conceptual experiment of
forcing otherwise identical people to invest differently in human capital. A major problem with this approach, as we
have seen, is the limited number of instruments, for if both schooling and
post-school investments, as proxied by
actual work time, are correlated with
ability (and with each other), then at
least two instruments are required.
Butcher and Case and Angrist and
Krueger must assume that work experience is exogenous in their studies, an
assumption often made in earnings
studies, because they only have one instrument. The exogeneity of work experience is thus a necessary assumption
for their methodology in addition to the
randomness of the instrument. The

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
military draft lottery, birth date, and
the sex of a firstborn child could potentially be used together as instruments to
estimate the returns to schooling, and
military and civilian work experience
from a more realistic specification of
the earnings function, but this has not
been carried out. However, there is evidence that other dimensions of labor
force experience than cumulated years
matter for earnings, such as the timing
and length of work interruptions. If
these work characteristics also reflect
choices that are related to ability and
schooling, additional natural instruments
would be needed to obtain consistent
estimates of schooling returns.
An alternative experimental approach
is to identify people who are actually
identical but who, for whatever reason,
obtain different levels of human capital.
Of course, the underlying problem is that
we do not observe abilities and so cannot a priori identify people who are the
same. This fundamental observational
problem has led researchers to exploit
within-pair differences of “identical”
twins starting in the late 1970’s (Jere
Behrman, Z. Hrubec, Paul Taubman,
and Terrence Wales 1980; Orley Ashenfelter and Krueger 1994; Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman 1994; Paul Miller,
Charles Mulvey, and Nick Martin 1995;
Ashenfelter and Cecilia Rouse 1998;
Behrman and Rosenzweig 1999; and Rouse
1999). 27 Monozygotic (MZ) twins are
identical at conception. It has been argued
that the differential levels of schooling
obtained by monozygotic twins, which cannot be due to differences in genetic endowments, corresponds exactly to the
conceptual experiment described above.
A major advantage of natural human
27 The first published study of earnings determinants based on twins appears to be Behrman and
Taubman (1976), which presents preliminary results to the study Behrman, Hrubec, Taubman,
and Wales 1980.

849

cloning, in contrast to the Angrist, AK,
and BC natural experiments, is that the
twins experiment is robust to the introduction of endogenous labor supply
choices, or to the addition of any number of endogenous choices that may affect outcomes of interest. To see why,
note that the cloning experiment can be
placed within an instrumental variables
framework. The difference in the
schooling of twins, because it is independent of genetic endowments, can
serve as an instrument for the school attainment of either twin. Similarly, the
difference in the work experience of twins
can serve as an instrument for either
twin’s work experience. Thus, unlike the
previous experiments, the cloning experiment supplies as many instruments
as there are endogenous variables.
A number of assumptions are needed
to achieve identification of the parameters of interest in the earnings equation
given by (3) based on the cloning experiment. To see how identification is
achieved, consider (3) rewritten in linear form for a pair of identical twins 1
and 2 born to family j:
M
M
M
lnyM
ij = α + βS ij + δX ij + µ j
(15)
i = 1,2
+ vM
ij ,
where the superscript M refers to MZ
twins, X is actual work experience, and
the returns to schooling and experience
are β and δ, respectively. We can also
write in linear form the relationships between schooling, work experience, and
the unmeasured common ability endowment of the twins µM
j , other common family factors given by f and
twin-specific factors u Sij and u Xij.
M
SM
ij = bS µ j + fSj + u Sij,

XM
ij

=

bX µM
j

+ fXj + uXij.

(16)

(17)
Estimation of (15) by OLS for any individual, a twin or not, given (16) and
(17), results in biased estimates of β
and δ. Put another way, there are more

850

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

parameters than there are empirical
moments in the data. Within-MZ-twin
estimates are obtained by differencing
(15) across the twins, which sweeps out
the common unobserved endowment component µM
j . Given the assumption that the
ability endowment is common across
the twins, that the twin-specific factors
determining schooling and experience
u Sij and u Xij are orthogonal to the errors
vM
ij in the earnings equation, and that
these “random” factors are drawn from
the same distribution for each twin, the
within-family variances and covariances
based on the twin differences in terms
of the parameters of the model are:
Var(∆ln yM ) = 2β2σ2Su + 2δ2σ2Xu + 2σ2v ,

(18)

Var(∆SM )

=

(19)

Var(∆XM )

=

Cov(∆SM ,∆XM)

2σ2Su,
2σ2Xu,

= 2cov(uS,uX),

(20)
(21)

Cov(∆ln yM ,∆SM ) = 2βσ2Su
+ 2δcov(uS,uX) and

(22)

Cov(∆ln yM ,∆XM ) = 2δσ2Xu
+ 2βcov(uS,uX).

(23)

As can be seen, there are now as many
empirical moments as there are parameters and the equations are linearly independent. There is exact identification.
Adding more determinants of earnings
potentially correlated with the endowment to (15), given the same set of assumptions for these additional determinants, adds as many additional empirical
moments as additional parameters. Thus,
as noted, under the maintained assumptions, there is no limit to the number of
observed earnings factors, potentially
correlated with ability, that can be added
for which returns can be identified.
Only one of the twins human cloning
studies so far has employed information
on actual work experience. As a consequence, under the assumption that all
workers work full-time after school and

that post-school work experience X a is
the appropriate measure of post-school
human capital, all but one of the set of
estimates from the cloning studies are
subject to the downward “Mincer” bias.
Twins are always the same age, so the
twin with the greater (lesser) amount of
schooling must have less (more) work
experience. All but one of the twinsbased “schooling returns” estimates thus
actually identify the difference between
the returns to schooling and work experience, not the returns to schooling
given work experience. Relatedly, the
“ability” bias identified from such studies is not the bias in the returns to
schooling but the bias in the difference
in schooling-experience returns.
Ironically, then, only if post-school
work choices vary among twins such
that schooling and age do not completely determine work experience can
twins-based studies be used to identify
the returns to schooling, as long as information on actual work experience is
collected and used in the earnings
specification. In fact, actual work experience appears to differ significantly
across identical twins. In data collected
in 1994 by Behrman, Rosenzweig, and
Taubman based on all twins born in
Minnesota from 1936–55, 35 percent of
(215) male-twin pairs had differences of
three or more years of actual full-time
work experience beyond that accounted
for by differences in completed schooling. The comparable figure for the 339
female-twin pairs in the data is 64 percent, with more than half of those exhibiting differences of eight or more
years of actual full-time work experience
net of schooling attainment differences.
With appropriate information on work
experience, there are two remaining
problems with the cloning experiment
approach, however. The first is that the
existence of errors in measurement in
any of the earnings determinants is not

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
only a barrier to identification, as one
or more error variances are introduced
but no more empirical moments, but the
resulting biases due to measurement
error are larger when within-twin estimators are used compared with estimates based on individuals (John Bishop
1976; Griliches 1979). This is because
the bias from measurement error is
greater the higher the within-pair correlation of the “true” variables. These are
especially high among identical twins.
Behrman and Rosenzweig (1999) report
for their sample of Minnesota-born
twins that the within-pair correlation in
schooling is .74 for identical twins. This
compares with a correlation of .52 for
nonidentical twin pairs. 28
With respect to the measurementerror problem, Ashenfelter and Krueger
(1994) proposed using reports by each
twin of his or her twin’s schooling as an
instrument to eliminate the bias due to
measurement error in schooling. With a
sufficient set of restrictions on the orthogonality of the measurement errors
in these reports, these “instruments”
add more empirical moments than
theoretical parameters so that, with
measurement error confined to schooling, the returns to true schooling are
identified. All recent studies using
twins to identify the returns to schooling have used a variant of this approach
to correct for measurement errors in
schooling. 29 Of course, there is nothing
“natural” about the instruments employed in twins studies to correct for
measurement error. Without knowledge
of true schooling attainment, it is not
28 They estimate that if the proportion of the total
variance in schooling that was measurement error
was ten percent, the bias towards zero in estimates
based on individuals would be nine percent but
would be 35 percent for the within-MZ estimator.
29 In Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman
(1994), the report by each twin’s son of the twin’s
schooling attainment is used as an instrument to
correct for measurement error.

851

possible to test the orthogonality assumptions about the correlation in measurement errors across the twins or
across own and cross-twin reports for a
twin that are necessary for identification.
The second potential problem with
the cloning experiment, and it is a major one, is that the twin-specific errors
u ij may not be orthogonal to earnings,
as assumed. One reason is that the unobservables that affect schooling decisions and wages (productivity) are not
necessarily only genetic in origin, i.e,
monozygotic twins may be identical at
conception, but not identical at birth or
as children. For example, monozygotic
twins differ in birth weight, which may
indicate that such twins do not face
identical environments within the
womb. In a sample of 1534 monozygotic
twin pairs from the Minnesota Twin
Registry, described in Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman (1994), the average absolute value of the difference in
birth weights between “identical” twins
is 10.5 ounces. The corresponding figure for same-sex nonidentical twin pairs
(N = 1357) is 11.2 ounces. Thus,
monozygotic twins may have unequal
mental and/or physical capacities that
manifest themselves at birth and beyond.
In fact, Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman (1994) report a significant positive
correlation between the difference in
the birth weights of “identical” twins
and subsequent differences in their
schooling attainment and thus earnings. 30 Additionally, during childhood
30 There are few studies of the relationship between birth weight and adult outcomes. One recent exception is Richard Strauss (2000), who
finds that low birth weight predicts lower academic achievement and income at age 26 based on
the 1970 British Birth Cohort. The problem with
this study, and all prior studies of the consequences of birth weight variation, however, is that
the separate effects of increasing the nutrition received by a fetus, which accounts for birth weight
variation within MZ twin-pairs, and possible genetic influences are not distinguished.

852

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

seemingly random events may occur to
one twin that have long-lasting, if not
permanent, effects on characteristics
that affect both schooling and earnings.
For example, one twin may suffer an accidental physical or mental impairment
that hinders schooling attainment and
earnings capacity. The permanent unobservable in these cases is not fully
captured by a genetic endowment. Such
health shocks or in-womb nutritional
differences are likely to result in a positive bias in human capital returns that is
not eliminated by differencing across
MZ twins.
Even if monozygotic twins were identical at birth and substantial health
shocks are relatively rare, economic
theory that recognizes that investment
in human capital is a decision suggests
that unobservables specific to twins will
be systematically related to their investment decisions and to their earnings. It
is straightforward to provide an example in which optimizing behavior induces a downward-biased estimate from
twins-based estimators. Recall that the
original schooling choice models assumed that either wages were deterministic, with exogenous post-schooling
full-time work, or that wage offers were
received only after completing schooling. Suppose, instead, the original formulation is changed so that a random
wage offer is received at the beginning
of the first period, when the individual
is deciding on whether or not to attend
school. Also, assume that this wage, if
accepted, is fixed over the working
life. 31 If the individual rejects the offer
and attends school for that period, another wage is drawn (independently of
the first period wage draw) at the beginning of the next period that is also
permanent. Denoting the stochastic
31 The assumption of a permanent wage is only
illustrative, although it is necessary for the argument that there be a persistent component.

component of the wage draw as ε, the
expected present values of earnings for
the school attendance choices are:
V1(s1 = 1 | S0) = exp[f(S0 + 1,µ)]E1{exp[ε2]}
A

⋅ ∑ βa + 1exp[g(a,µ)] − c, (24)
a=0

V1(s1 = 0 | S0) = exp[f(S0,µ)]exp[ε1]
A

⋅ ∑ βaexp[g(a,µ)].
a=0

Notice that these values differ from the
corresponding ones in (3) by the actual
(permanent) wage shock if the individual
does not attend school in period one and
by the expected wage shock if the individual attends school. The decision
rule, as before, is to attend school
if V1(s1 = 1 | S0) ≥ V1(s0 = 1 | S0). However,
because in this case the value of not attending school depends on the actual
wage draw, the individual will attend
school only if the wage draw is below a
cut-off value, which depends on the rate
of interest, the cost of schooling, the parameters of the wage function (f and g),
and the expectation of the (exponential
of the) wage draw, i.e.,
s1 = 1
s1 = 0

if ε1 < ε∗1{r,c,f,g,E(exp(ε2))},
otherwise.

(25)

Thus, if one of a twin pair does not
attend school and the other does attend, for the former we only observe
wages that satisfy the condition that
ε1 > ε∗1, while for the latter we observe
wages that span the entire wage distribution. The average (accepted) wage
for twins with lower schooling will
therefore overstate the average (offered) wage and thus the return to
schooling will be understated.
Thus, despite the potential advantage
of natural human cloning in providing
as many instruments as there are measured earnings determinants, it is difficult to conclude from the human cloning

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
experiment, as implemented to date,
what the true returns to schooling are or
even to define their bounds. This is because of (i) the possibility that schooling
decisions are influenced by persistent
wage shocks, which biases schooling return estimates based on within-twin estimators downward, (ii) the omission of
work experience, which evidently differs across twins and is correlated with
schooling, and (iii) the existence of at
least early environmentally-determined
differences in endowments across
clones that may lead to upward biases
in schooling. And, given that monozygotic twins differ neither in birth date
nor gender, twins-based estimates cannot be used in conjunction with the AK,
BC, or Angrist natural instruments to
circumvent some of these sources of bias.
4. Estimating Determinants
of Consumption and Labor Supply
Using Weather Variation
4.1 Permanent and Transitory Income
Elasticities of Consumption and
Savings
One of the most widely employed and
tested models of life-cycle savings and
consumption is the “permanent income” model. In recent years, researchers have been interested in providing evidence on the extent to which
capital markets are incomplete, as is indicated if consumption is “excessively”
sensitive to contemporaneous income.
Life-cycle models of consumption
which admit to uncertainty about future
income flows have the feature that the
responsiveness of consumption (and
savings) to income depends on the extent to which fluctuations in income are
unanticipated and transitory. Distinguishing between transitory and permanent income components and identifying their effects are the principal
challenges of this literature. Data sets

853

do not provide measures of income that
conveniently identify incomes by these
theoretical concepts. Moreover, fluctuations in incomes may reflect the choices
of agents—because income at any given
point in the life-cycle may reflect past
investment and savings decisions, correlations between income changes and
consumption may not provide much insight into these models. For example, in
agricultural populations farmers plant
seeds or invest in equipment that affects
the level and variability of incomes
(Rosenzweig and Hans Binswanger
1993), and these may reflect preferences (e.g., for risk) that also affect
consumption choices.
Five studies have used weather variables, in the context of farm households, as a means of identifying the effects of transitory and permanent
components of income (Wolpin 1982;
Christina Paxson 1992; Hanan Jacoby
and Emmanuel Skofias 1998; Anjini Kochar 1999; and Elaina Rose 1999).
Weather has desirable features for the
analysis of income effects: weather
events have significant effects on farm
income; weather events cannot be affected by the behavior of the farmers
themselves and satisfy the criterion of
randomness; weather distributions are
characterized by stationarity over periods of time relevant to the study of income effects on consumption so that
the distinctions between permanent and
transitory are meaningful; and long
time-series of data describing daily
rainfall, which are available in many
countries of the world, enable the precise estimation of the permanent parameters describing the moments of the
weather distributions. 32 Despite these
32 Note that there can be more than one measure of weather (e.g., daily rainfall, the timing of
the onset of the rainy season, number and length
of dry spells) that affects output and multiple moments describing the distribution of each measure.

854

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

advantages, however, the estimates of
income effects based on weather events
have been based on theoretical frameworks, implicit or explicit, that have
employed strong and untested assumptions about the operation of rural labor
markets, preferences, and farm technology, assumptions that appear to be necessary for identification of the effects of
interest. Indeed, recent work has used
weather information to look at the direct
relationship between income risk, income shocks, and labor supply (Rose
forthcoming; Kochar 1999).
4.1.1 Income and Consumption without
Labor Supply
To illustrate what weather-based instruments identify and theoretical issues that weather-based instrumental estimates must confront, we construct a
simple farm model that incorporates
transitory and permanent income effects.
We begin with the simplest two-period
case in which there are no inputs to
production other than weather and only
consumption provides utility. Thus we
initially abstract from the choice of labor supply and non-farm labor earnings.
Each farm household maximizes its expected present discounted utility flow
from consumption, E1{U(c1) + βU(c2)},
where β(= 1 +1 ρ ) is the subjective discount factor, subject to income constraints. In each period the farmer receives farm income from his output and
an exogenous amount of “assured” income y 0 that is known in advance. 33
Farm income is stochastic, such that
farm output yt = f(ω t), with ω t a measure
of weather at t (e.g., the amount of rainfall). Weather is random and iid over
time. A weather realization is drawn
33 We assume the existence of a permanent assured income flow as a means of contrasting its
impact on savings to that of income effects generated by differences in permanent weather. Extending the model to more than two periods would
not change any essential points of the argument.

each period independently from a
known distribution with finite moments.
To distinguish permanent and transitory
− + ε , where ω
− is mean
weather, let ω t = ω
t
weather and εt is an unforecastable
weather shock (iid over time).
Farmers can save and borrow, but
they cannot purchase insurance and do
not make bequests. With a unit output
price, the budget constraints in the first
and second periods are thus:
c1 + a2 = y1 + y0
c2 = a2(1 + r) + y2 + y0

(26)

where a 2 is savings in period 1 and r is
the interest rate.34 In the second period,
because all income is consumed, having
an extra dollar of income from any
source—whether due to living in an area
in which mean rainfall is higher, getting
a favorable weather shock, or having a
higher amount of assured income—will
increase second-period consumption by
one dollar. In period one, however, consumption effects will differ depending
on whether the assured income level is
increased (a permanent income change)
or whether only farm income increases
in the period. In the first period the
farm household’s problem is to choose
the level of assets to carry over to period
two that maximizes expected discounted
lifetime utility, U[f(ω 1) + y0 − a2] + βEω
U[(1 + r)a2 + f(ω 2) + y0].
The first-order condition is the standard
Euler equation,
U′1 = β(1 + r)EωU′2.35

(27)

It is straightforward to show that the
effect of a change in the assured
income flow on first-period savings is
∂a2 / ∂y0 =

U′′1 − β(1 + r)EωU′′2
. (28a)
U′′1 + β(1 + r)2EωU′′2

34 Given the assumption of no bequests, initial
assets (a 1), other than land, is zero. Thus, assets
carried into period two is identical to savings from
period one.
35 We are assuming the Inada conditions hold.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
In contrast, the instrumental variables estimator of the effect of permanent income on savings that uses variation (say, over space) in permanent
weather characteristics, in this case the
− ) of the weather distribution, is
mean ( ω
−
∂a2 / ∂ω
−
∂y1 / ∂ω

(28b)
− − β(1 + r)E [U′′ ⋅ ∂y / ∂w
−]
U′′1⋅ ∂y1 / ∂w
ω
2
2
=
.
−
U′′1 + β(1 + r)2EωU′′2] ⋅ ∂y1 / ∂w

Comparing (28a) and (28b), it is clear
that the instrumental variables estimator
of the permanent income effect on savings is equivalent to the true permanent
income effect only if weather affects out− + ε ). 36
put linearly, i.e., only if yt = γ(ω
t
Unlike permanent weather, the instrumental variables estimator based on
a change in transitory weather in period
one does identify the effect on savings
of a one-dollar increase in transitory income, say from a one-dollar increase in
income that occurred in period one
only, namely
∂a2 / ∂y1 =

∂a2 / ∂ε1
∂y1 / ∂ε1

(28c)
U′′1
.
2
U′′1 + β(1 + r) EωU′′2
If the model is correct, as seen in (28a)
and (28c), the estimated effect on savings of a one-dollar increase in transitory
income in period one should exceed the
effect of an anticipated permanent
one-dollar increase in income. 37
=

36 Using second period output in the first stage
of the IV estimator, or any fixed-weighted average
of output in the two periods, would not change the
general result, although the bias in the estimator
would be different for different measures of output.
37 In the special case of quadratic utility, and
where the rate of interest and the rate of time
preference are both zero, one-half of any increase
in transitory income is saved (and consumed in the
next period) while none of any increase in permanent income is saved.

855

Wolpin used differences across Indian districts in the mean of the rainfall
distribution in order to estimate the
permanent income effect for rural
farmers. 38 He did not use an explicit
optimizing model, instead assuming
both a consumption function that was
linear in permanent income and an
income-generating function that was
linear in the rainfall mean. His finding
of a permanent income elasticity close
to unity could, in the context of the
optimizing model presented above, be
artifactual. 39
Wolpin used contemporaneous villagelevel indicators of weather deviations
as instruments to estimate the transitory income effect. He found those
effects to be statistically indistinguishable from zero, although point estimates
were quite imprecise. Paxson used household survey data on farmers in rural Thailand and time-series of regional rainfall
to estimate the effects of transitory income on savings. In particular, Paxson
jointly estimated the effects on savings
and on income of deviations in contemporaneous rainfall from regional means
for each of four crop seasons. She then
tested what she called a “strong version” of the permanent income hypothesis—that the four season-specific
38 Note that spatial differences in permanent
characteristics of the weather distribution could
be poor instruments for differences in permanent
income levels if property values reflect the returns
to weather and each generation pays for these returns. In the worst case, each generation purchases land at the market price with those in
better-climate areas paying a higher price. In that
case, permanent climate characteristics would
have no explanatory power in the determination
of income variation across space. Wolpin finds,
however, that these variables produce precise
estimates of income effects on consumption in
India.
39 Paxson used measures of land holdings to predict permanent income. This latter instrument
does not appear to qualify as a natural natural experiment, as, for example, households with larger
accumulated land holdings may be more likely to
be savers.

856

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

estimated weather-variable effects on
savings and on income were identical,
equivalent to the IV estimator of the
transitory income effect on savings being
equal to one. Her estimates could not
reject this hypothesis. 40
4.1.2 Endogenous Labor Supply, Labor
Markets, and Savings
Both Paxson and Wolpin used gross
farm income net of the cost of paid inputs as the measure of farm income.
However, farm households often use
“unpaid” family labor instead of or in
addition to hired labor. It is obvious
that if the household uses only hired labor inputs, the IV estimators in (28b,
28c) would have to be based on net
revenues, i.e., the value of output net of
the cost of the hired labor. 41 When family labor is also used, however, the IV
estimator based on the income measure
used in the Paxson and Wolpin studies
yields biased estimates of income effects on consumption. The direction of
the bias and the appropriate measure of
income to use in order to retrieve parameters of interest depend on what is
assumed about family labor, and more
generally on the extent to which labor
markets are complete.
We now augment the simple farm
consumption model to allow the household a choice of how to allocate the labor of its family members to show that
the properties of the IV estimator using
random weather as an instrument for
income depend importantly on assumptions about the heterogeneity and marketability of farm family labor. We fo40 Interestingly, the IV estimates using landholdings to test the strong version of the permanent income hypothesis led to rejection, because
larger land holders appeared to save too much.
This is consistent with wealth and savings both
being related to unobserved propensities to save.
41 Wolpin notes that profits should be defined as
net of the implicit cost of family labor, but, as with
Paxson, did not have data on family labor inputs.

cus on the identification of transitory
income effects both because expressions are simpler and because the permanent income effect cannot be correctly estimated using permanent
weather except under strong simplifying
assumptions about its effect on production. For convenience, we assume that
the household’s utility in each period
depends on the total amount of leisure
consumed by its household members
and total household consumption,
U t(C t,l t). With respect to production,
we assume that there are two types of
labor inputs—manual labor and supervisory labor. Family labor and hired labor supplied to manual tasks are assumed to be perfect substitutes in
production, while supervisory labor
must be supplied by household members alone. Output in period t is thus
yt = f(ht + mt,st,ω t), where h t is the
amount of hired manual labor, m t is the
amount of family manual labor, and s t is
the amount of family supervisory labor.
Hired labor can be purchased competitively at wage w. The total amount of
household labor is normalized to one.
We assume that labor utilization decisions take place after the realization of
the weather shock and that the wage is
neither affected by these decisions nor
by the weather shock.
Assuming no bequests (other than
land and other fixed inputs) as before,
the household’s problem in period two
is to choose the amounts of hired and
family manual labor and the amount
of supervisory labor to use in farm production. Defining maximized utility in
period two as
V2(a2,ε2) = ma x U [(1 + r)a2
h 2,m 2,s2

− + ε2) + y0
+ f(h2 + m 2,s2,ω
− wh2, 1 − m2 − s2],

(29)

the Kuhn-Tucker first-order conditions
are:

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
h2: f1 = w,
∂U ⁄ ∂l2
m 2:
≥ f1 ,
∂U ⁄ ∂c2
(30)
∂U ⁄ ∂l2
s2 :
= f2 ,
∂U ⁄ ∂c2
There are two important cases to consider: (i) when the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption equals the market wage for manual
labor (m 2 > 0), which in this case means
that family labor and hired labor are
both marketed, and (ii) family labor is
only used to supervise and supervisors
cannot be hired (m 2 = 0), in which case
the relevant first-order condition is an
inequality and no market wage exists for
family labor.
Case I: In this case, the marginal
product of (total) manual labor and the
marginal product of supervisory labor
are both equal to the market wage of
hired labor. Thus, their input demand
functions depend only on the market
wage and the weather realization, i.e.,
h 2 + m 2 = hm(ω 2,w) and s 2 = s(ω 2,w), as
well as technology parameters. 42 Unlike
family-supplied supervisory labor, however, family manual labor depends not
only on weather and the market wage,
but also on the level of assured income,
i.e., m 2 = m(ω 2,w,y 0). As long as family
leisure is a normal good, an increase in
assured income will reduce the amount
of family-supplied manual labor. 43
Weather has two effects on family manual
42 The effects of the weather realization on input demands are:

∂hm 2
∂ω 2

∝ y23y12 − y13y22 and

43 The

∂s2
∂ω 2

∝ y13y21 − y23y11.

pure income effect on family manual labor,
∂m 2
∂y0

∝ u 2 u 11 − u 1 u 21,

is negative as long as leisure is a normal good.
Because supervisory labor is independent of assured income, an increase in leisure due to an increase in assured income must be exactly offset by
a reduction in family manual labor.

857

labor. First, a favorable weather outcome
that increases output reduces m2 through
the income effect. Second, weather affects the use of supervisory labor and
thus leisure, which changes the leisureconsumption marginal rate of substitution. However, because the latter is
equal to the (unchanged) wage rate for
hired labor, family manual labor must
change one-for-one in the opposite
direction. Specifically,
∂s2
∂m 2
∂m 2
= −
+ f3
.
∂ω 2
∂ω 2
∂y0
Consumption increases with assured
income, but less than dollar for dollar, as
some of the increased income is taken
in leisure; specifically,
∂m 2
∂c2
=w
+ 1.
∂y0
∂y0
The effect of the weather realization on
consumption is proportional to this pure
income effect,
∂c2
∂c2
= f3
.
∂ω 2
∂y0
Given this relationship, the IV estimator
of the pure income effect on consumption must be based not on revenues net
of only the cost of hired labor inputs, but
on revenues net of the cost of hired labor and family labor inputs, where the
latter are valued at the market wage for
hired manual labor. Thus, the effect of a
change in last period income on consumption (the same as the effect of
assured income) is
∂c2 / ∂ε2
∂c2
(31)
=
.
∂y2 ∂(y2 − wh2 − wm 2 − ws2) / ∂ε2
It is tedious but straightforward to
demonstrate that the IV estimator of
the effect on first-period savings of a
transitory change in first-period income
also requires that this same income
measure be used (as in period two, we
are assuming that the family supplies a
positive amount of labor to the manual

858

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

task in period one). For example, the
effect on savings of a transitory change
in income in period one is
∂a2 / ∂ε1
∂a2
=
.
∂y1 ∂(y1 − wh1 − wm 1 − ws1) / ∂ε1

(32)

These results imply that in the
Wolpin (1982) and Paxson (1992) studies which used crop revenues net of
only hired inputs as the measure of income, the weather-based estimates of
savings effects are biased upward. If leisure is a normal good, then favorable
weather must reduce the total amount
of family supplied labor and, therefore,
the effect of weather on profits net of
the cost of hired labor will understate
its effect on profits net of the cost of
hired plus family labor. Thus, the IV
estimator of the impact on savings of
a transitory income change will be
overstated. Conversely, the impact on
consumption will be understated. The
study by Kochar, based on longitudinal
data from forty households in each of
three villages in South India, focuses
explicitly on how labor supply by family
members is responsive to income shocks
and, indeed, can serve as a consumptionsmoothing mechanism. She employs a
model in which labor supply is a choice,
and, in particular, pays attention to the
fact that there are different cases or
corner solutions; in particular, that in
some households family members do
not work in the wage labor market. Kochar estimates a household consumption equation only for those households
with labor market participants, taking
into account the selectivity of that sample. However, transitory income, instrumented by monthly rainfall levels, is
measured, as in Paxson’s and Wolpin’s
studies, gross of the value of family labor. Kochar’s finding of a small effect
of the income shock on consumption
could therefore also be due to the pres-

ence of on-farm labor-supply responses,
highlighted in her model, that are
embedded in her measure of farm profits.
Jacoby and Skoufias (1998) assume,
in contrast to Kochar, that family and
hired labor are perfect substitutes and
net out the cost of both hired and family labor, valued at the market wage, as
is required to obtain consistent estimates of income effects in the model
under that assumption. Jacoby and
Skoufias used the same data set as Kochar. Profits are decomposed into anticipated and unanticipated components. Estimates of anticipated profits
are based on household and farm characteristics considered to be predetermined and their interactions with rainfall characteristics that are realized
prior to planting, and thus known to the
farmer at the time planting decisions
are made. Estimates of unanticipated
profits are based on interactions of the
predetermined variables with rainfall
characteristics realized after planting
and just prior to harvesting, which are
unknown at the time of planting. Aggregate (village) level shocks are thus assumed to affect profits of individual
farmers idiosyncratically. The results of
the instrumental variables estimation
using rainfall show that neither the effect of anticipated nor unanticipated
profits on consumption expenditures
within a season is statistically or economically significant. This result implies that farm households are able to
smooth consumption over seasons as if
there were perfect markets.
Case II. m 2 = 0. We now show that
the validity of the Jacoby and Skoufias
findings, and the inferences about the
biases in the Wolpin, Paxson, and Kochar studies, rest importantly on the assumption that hired and family labor
are perfect substitutes for at least one
labor task and that family labor is actually employed in that task. In particular,

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
we consider the case in which family labor is not employed in the manual task,
e.g., the value of leisure is sufficiently
high and/or the marginal product of supervisory labor is sufficiently high. This
case is equivalent to one in which there
are no production tasks in which family
labor and hired labor are perfect substitutes. As a consequence of this, the supply of farm labor to the supervisory task
as well as the demand for hired manual
labor will not be independent of the
level of income; that is, the production
and consumption sectors are no longer
separable. In particular, if leisure is a
normal good, then the supply of farm
supervisory labor will decline as income
in any period increases and the demand
for hired labor will also decline if manual labor and supervisory labor are complements (and increase if they are
substitutes).
As in the previous case, a dollar increase in last-period income (assured
income) increases consumption by less
than a dollar as leisure is increased;
specifically,
∂s2
∂c2
= f2
+ 1.
∂y2
∂y2
This expression differs from the previous
case in that the marginal product of the
input that is affected by the change in
income (supervisory labor in this case
and manual labor in the previous case)
cannot be valued at a market wage. However, the lack of a market for tasks performed by family labor implies that the
effect of weather on consumption is no
longer proportional to the (assured) income effect. The expression for the effect
of weather on consumption is given by:
∂c2
 f13f21 − f11f23 
∂c2
= f3
+ f2 
,
∂ε2
∂y2
∆



859

consumption has two components, one
that arises from the direct effect of
weather on income (the effect that is
proportional to the income effect on
consumption) and one that arises from
the effect of weather on net profits
through its effect on the supply of supervisory labor (an effect that does not arise
in equilibrium in the previous case because the marginal product of supervisory labor is equal to the fixed market
wage).44 Dividing (33), the weather effect
on consumption, by the input-constant
effect of weather on revenues, i.e., by
∂s2
∂h2
f3 = f(h2,s2,ω 2) − w
− f2
,
∂ω 2
∂ω 2
will not provide a consistent estimate of
the transitory income effect on consumption because of the existence of the second term in (33). Moreover, the direction of the bias in the IV estimator based
on such an income measure can be of
either sign. Similar results can be demonstrated for the effect of transitory income effects on period-one savings.
Thus, in this case, there is no measure of
net income that can be used as the basis
of a weather-based IV estimator of transitory income effects that would be
consistent.
The conclusions made by Rose (1999)
about Indian households’ ability to
smooth consumption, in her innovative
study of the effects of weather shocks
on sex-specific child survival, based on
the same national probability sample of
rural households used by Wolpin, also
rests importantly on these labor-market
and technology assumptions. In that
study, Rose looks at the reduced-form
relationship between weather shocks—
district-specific deviations in annual

(33)

where ∆ > 0 is the appropriate bordered
Hessian for the maximization problem.
As seen in (33), the effect of weather on

44 This is just an application of the envelope
theorem in the complete markets case. In fact, the
bracketed component of the second term in (33) is
exactly the effect of weather on supervisory labor
in the complete markets case.

860

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

rainfall from a 21-year average—occurring at three life-cycle stages for a
child: at birth, in its first year of life,
and in its second year. She finds that
girls are less likely to survive than are
boys if an adverse weather shock occurs
in the first year after birth. She interprets this as indicating that households
cannot successfully smooth consumption and that when income levels are
low, resource allocations are such as to
discriminate against girl infants. However, while the inferences about discrimination appear to be appropriate,
the absence of information on the relationship between the weather shocks
and income in the study means that it is
not possible to assess whether the effects of the weather shocks on child survival indicate that income shocks on resource allocations are small or large.
Moreover, if there are no perfect substitutes for the mother’s time, for example, in the caring of children and in
farm production, then the effect of the
weather shock may reflect optimal
time-allocation responses (and preferences for boys) to weather-induced land
productivity changes and not just the
effect of income shocks, consistent with
Rose’s work (Rose forthcoming) showing that an adverse weather shock leads
to more off-farm work.
It would appear that a necessary condition for weather variation to be useful
for estimating income effects and the
degree of consumption smoothing,
given the appropriate measurement of
net income, is that family and hired labor are perfect substitutes in at least
one task. If, for example, it is not possible for reasons of moral hazard to hire
supervisory farm labor, then weatherbased income effects obtained from
farm populations, where this instrument
has the most power, will be biased. To
validate studies of income effects based
on the natural natural weather experi-

ment thus requires tests of separability.
Such tests themselves, however, often
require additional identifying restrictions. 45 We can carry out a simple test
of the plausibility of the labor-market
assumptions used in the Wolpin, Paxson, and Jacoby and Skoufias studies
using a weather instrument. We use a
sample of 2,567 farm households from a
national sample survey of all rural Indian households, numbering 4,896, carried out in 1982, the Rural Economic
and Demographic Survey (Vashishtha
1978), supplemented by rainfall data. A
unique feature of these data is that they
distinguish between supervisory and
crop-labor time (days worked in the
crop year 1981–82) among family members. The data indicate that in over 12
percent of farms at least one family
member devotes time to supervisory
tasks. These are the larger farm households in which the labor force is sufficiently large to have family members
specialize and therefore where it is possible to readily distinguish supervisory
activities from manual labor tasks.
We would expect that if there are
hired substitutes for supervisory labor,
as there appear likely to be for crop or
manual labor, exogenous variations in
permanent attributes of weather should
have the same effects on the amounts of
both types of family labor. In particular,
given that leisure is a normal good, in
the Indian context higher average levels
of weather should be associated with
lower days worked in both supervisory
and crop tasks among family workers.
Based on an annual time-series of average daily rainfall from 1961 through
1980 at the district level we constructed
the mean rainfall per day in the district
in which each farm household resided.
45 For example, a critical assumption in Benjamin’s (1992) test of separability among Indonesian farm households is that household size variation conforms to the randomness criterion.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”

861

TABLE 5
RURAL INDIAN FARM HOUSEHOLDS: AVERAGE DAILY RAINFALL, ANNUAL CROP-LABOR DAYS
PER FAMILY WORKER AND ANNUAL FAMILY SUPERVISORY DAYS
(NCAER REDS)

Crop-Labor Days per
Family Worker (OLS)

Family Supervisory Days
(ML Tobit)

Ratio of Supervisory to
Crop-Labor Days
(ML Tobit)

Mean (S.D.)

41.0 (39.6)

2.73 (13.5)

.356 (5.18)

Mean rainfall
(mm per day)

–.00825
(.0016)a

.0208
(.0030)

.00647
(.0010)

49.3
(1.79)

–83.6
(5.36)

–27.8
(21.4)

—

52.5
(2.38)

16.6
(.712)

2,567

2,567

2,567

Variable

Constant
S.E.
N
a Standard

errors in parentheses.

We then regressed number of crop days
per family worker (adults aged 15–59)
on this rainfall measure. Table 5 presents the estimates. As can be seen, in
areas in which rainfall levels are higher
on average, adult family members work
significantly fewer days per year. This is
consistent with leisure being a normal
good, given that higher rainfall levels
are associated with higher output, and
with family crop labor being substitutable with hired labor. The result also
demonstrates why it is necessary to net
out the cost of family labor from income in assessing income effects based
on weather variation. However, family
time in supervisory activities is actually
higher in such areas, as is the ratio of
supervisory to crop-labor family days,
indicating the difficulty of obtaining
market substitutes for supervisory labor. This suggests that netting out total
family labor time valued at the hired labor wage may not be sufficient to obtain identification of either permanent
or transitory income effects using weather
events as instrumental variables.
Finally, assumptions about the local

marketability of labor inputs are not
sufficient to pin down income effects
using weather variables. Weather events
and labor supply decisions can affect
not only income but also relative commodity prices. In the agricultural model
incorporating labor supply choice, identification of income effects using spatial
and intertemporal variation in weather
events also requires that the local
weather events not affect the localespecific price of the consumption good
relative to the wage. One sufficient condition is that either all inputs, including
labor, or all goods are perfectly spatially
mobile. Another is that leisure and consumption are strongly separable. That
the permanent income studies do not
include relative prices, inclusive of
wages, in the consumption function estimated reflects one or another of these
additional assumptions, although the assumptions are never stated. In the absence of these restrictions, more instruments would be needed than weather
events to account for both endogenouslydetermined price and income effects, as
relative prices would likely be correlated

862

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

with weather-driven income variation
and consequent consumption and labor
supply choices. In that case too, the effects on consumption choices of uncertainty about prices and wages would
also have to be considered. 46
5. Estimating the Effect of Children
on Female Labor Supply
A major challenge in labor economics
is to explain the secular increase in the
labor force participation of married
women in the United States and most
industrialized countries. One of the
candidate factors in the rise in female
labor-force participation is the decline
in fertility. Given that both labor supply
and fertility decisions are endogenously
chosen, instrumental variables have
been employed in many studies (e.g.,
Belton Fleisher and George Rhodes
1982; T. Paul Schultz 1980; and see
Martin Browning 1992) to assess the
contribution of changing fertility on
maternal participation and work time. 47
The first to use a random natural
event—twins on the first birth—to estimate how fertility change affects maternal labor supply was Rosenzweig and
Wolpin (1980b), followed by Stephen
Bronars and Jeff Grogger (1994), Jaisri
46 At least in the Indian context, spatial wage
differences are significant and sensitive to weather
events (Rosenzweig 1986). Given that consumption and leisure are substitutes, then if wage rates
and income both co-move positively with favorable
weather shocks and the wage is excluded from the
specification of the consumption equation, the estimated transitory income effect is positively biased because it also contains a substitution term.
In the case in which family (supervisory) labor is
not marketed, an additional omitted variable is the
“shadow” wage of this labor, which is endogenously determined and varies with local weather.
47 Almost all of these restrictions and assumptions appear to be arbitrary. For example, in
Fleisher and Rhodes’ study (1982) of the effects of
fertility on labor supply the authors assume that
parents’ schooling is exogenous (there are no common unobservable elements that affect both decisions), and that father’s schooling affects fertility
but not the mother’s labor force decisions.

Gangadharan and Joshua Rosenbloom
(1996), and Joyce Jacobsen, James
Pearce and Rosenbloom (1999). Recently Angrist and Evans employed the
gender of the first two births, specifically sex-sameness, as a natural instrument to estimate fertility effects on
married women’s labor supply. In this
section we show that the specific identification strategies used in both the set
of “twins-first” studies and that by Angrist and Evans place strong restrictions
on both preferences and on household
technology and we present empirical
evidence based on unique data from India that calls into question one of these
important restrictions. Before turning
to the issue of identification, we first
review the main empirical results of the
studies that make use of the initial
twin-births and child gender natural
experiments.
Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980b),
using data from the 1965 and 1973 National Fertility Surveys, found that
among women who had their first births
between the ages of 15 and 24, those
who had twins on their first birth had
0.65 more children on average ten years
later. 48 The same comparison for
women who had their first births between 25 and 34 yielded a difference of
0.31 births. However, for the younger
age at first birth group of women, completed fertility for those with twins, as
measured twenty years later, was only
48 As noted, analogous to the “any sisters” instrument of BC, the existence of any twin births in
a household would be an inappropriate instrument
because its probability is increasing in the number
of pregnancies, even if the probability of a twin
birth is independent of the number of prior pregnancies (actually, the probability of twinning is increasing in the number of prior births). Using
twinning on the first birth only avoids this problem. However, the probability of having a twin at
any parity is increasing in age at birth. RW show
that holding age at first birth constant, even
though the timing of the first birth may itself be a
choice, maintains the validity of the twins-first
instrument.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
0.15 greater than for those without
twins. 49 This rather small difference in
completed family size leads to two important conclusions: (i) that contraceptive adjustment costs are small and (ii)
that the twins first experiment would
seem to correspond mainly to a difference in the timing of births, i.e., having
one additional child at an earlier age
offset by having one less child over the
remaining fecund period. Bronars and
Grogger (1994) and Jacobsen, Pearce,
and Rosenbloom (1999) use 1970 and
1980 Census data and thus have larger
first-birth twins samples. Using true cohorts, they find a similar attenuation in
total births over the ten-year period
subsequent to the birth. 50
With respect to labor supply, RW
found that among women who had their
first births between the ages of 15 and
24, those who had twins had a .37
percentage-point lower labor force participation rate in that age interval than
did women without twins. Between the
ages of 25 and 34, the labor force participation rate differential fell to .10.
However, between 35 and 44, twins
mothers actually had a .14 percentagepoint higher labor force participation
rate. 51 Dividing the labor supply effects
by the fertility effects of twins-first
yields the Wald estimates of the effect
of an additional child on labor force
participation rates.
RW interpret the twins first experiment within the context of a two-period
model of fertility and labor supply. Parents also derive utility from the quality
of their children, which depends directly on their number and on the
amount of time the woman spends at
49 These figures are based on synthetic cohorts.
50 See also Gangadharan and Rosenbloom (1994).
51 This reversal also occurred using true cohort

comparisons, although the sample sizes were quite
small. BG find that labor force participation rates
do not differ after ten years.

863

home. In addition, the market wage in
the second period depends on work experience gained in period one. There is
a fixed price of having an additional
child, e.g., birth and contraceptive
costs, independent of child quality. In
the first period, women decide on how
many children to have and on hours
worked (and implicitly on child quality)
and in the second period on hours
worked. RW’s main result is that the effect of an exogenous additional child on
hours worked in either period is the ratio of the compensated effect of the
fixed price of a child on hours worked
to the same compensated effect on fertility. 52 Note that the Wald estimator
that used the price of a child, if it were
observed, as an instrumental variable
would correspond to the ratio of uncompensated price effects, which differs
from the effect of an exogenous additional child on labor supply that correctly is derived from the conditional
demand function. 53
Angrist and Evans (1998) showed
that, as is the case for twin-first births,
the sex ratio of the first two children
affects subsequent fertility decisions.
Using data from the 1980 and 1990 U.S.
Census, they found that among parents
who have two or more children the proportion who have a third birth is greater
by .06 if the first two children were of
the same sex than if they were of the
opposite sex. In terms of labor supply
effects, AE estimate that the additional
(third) child reduces female labor force
participation rates by about .12 (1980).
52 This result is a direct application of rationing
theory (James Tobin and Hendrik Houthakker
1950–51). The resulting relationship between labor supply and (exogenous) fertility is a conditional demand function (Robert Pollak 1969).
53 Of course, full estimation of the ordinary demand functions for labor supply and fertility
would, in the context of the two-period model,
provide all of the information necessary to calculate the conditional demand function.

864

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

In contrast, they also find that using as an
instrument having twins on the second
birth reduces labor force participation
rates by .08.
AE’s published paper does not present a behavioral model within which to
interpret their estimates. However, they
do refer to a specific model set out in an
earlier version of the published article
(Angrist and Evans 1996). This highly
restrictive model, however, fails to deliver the result that the Wald estimator
of the labor supply effect of exogenous
additional children based on the samesex instrument is identical to the direct
effect of manipulating fertility except in
the case of having a perfect measure of
and controlling for lifetime wealth.
The twins-based and child-genderbased Wald estimators both require restrictions on preferences and (household) technology in order to go from
the identification of an exogenous variable beyond the control of economic
agents to the identification of how fertility affects labor supply. Both the
studies that use the twins-first and sexsameness natural experiments impose
the (exclusion) restriction that the natural
event—having twins on the first birth or
having children of the same sex in the
first two births—does not directly affect
the subsequent labor supply of either
parent except through its effect on having an additional birth. What assumptions about behavior or technology yield
this restriction? What does the Wald estimate reveal about behavior and/or
technology? We set out a simple model
of fertility and labor supply choices to
elucidate the interpretation of the Wald
estimators from these studies and to
provide a framework for garnering additional empirical evidence that sheds
light on the realism of the identification restrictions. The model shows that
the restrictions required for identifying
the fertility effect on labor supply

using either natural experiment involve
strong (and similar) assumptions about
preferences and household technology.
The model we set out incorporates
features highlighted in the twins-first
and sex-sameness studies—parental
preferences and child rearing costs depend on the spacing of children and on
the sex composition of children. Specifically, in each period of the model a
woman decides on whether or not to
have a child, n = {0,1}, and whether or
not to work, h = {0,1}, up to a last period when she can have no more children. In that period, the woman thus
makes a labor supply decision only. The
woman’s utility in each period depends
on her consumption, c, her labor supply, the stock of children at the beginning of the period, N, the stock of children at the beginning of all prior
periods, and the sex composition of her
children, where we denote r as the fraction of female children. The woman receives a wage, w, in each period that
she works, has an exogenous income flow
each period, y, and bears a per-child rearing cost, e. The child rearing cost is assumed to depend on the spacing of births
and the sex composition of children.
All of our points can be illustrated by
considering the final-period labor supply
decision. To obtain analytical solutions,
we adopt a quadratic utility function.
We also assume that the “bliss-point”
sex-ratio is one-half (parents prefer to
have mixed-sex children) but that the
child rearing cost, reflecting the savings
from sex-specific hand-me-downs, is
minimized when all children are the
same sex, i.e., r = 0 or 1. Both the sexratio and the spacing of children are allowed to affect the marginal utility of
leisure. Assuming that the terminal period of the model is the fourth, 54 the
54 A minimum of four periods is needed to capture the possibility of different sex ratios, which
require at least two births.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
final-period optimization problem is
then to maximize
u4 = c4 + α1N 3 − α2N 23
− α3(r3 − .5)2 + α4(1 − h4)
+ α5c4N 3 + α6c4(1 − h4)
+ α7N 3(1 − h4)
(34)
+ α71N 1(1 − h4) + α72N 2(1 − h4)
+ α8(1 − h4)(r3 − .5)2

with respect to the choice of h 4 subject
to the budget constraint
c4 = y + wh4 − e1N 3 − e11N 1 − e12N 2
− e2(r3 − .5)2.

(35)

The final-period work decision is
made by comparing utility over the two
work alternatives, which will depend
on both the stock and spacing of children and the sex-ratio. Specifically,
suppose that the woman has two nontwin children of the same sex by the
end of the third period, then the difference between the utility of working and
not working in the final period is given
by
u4[h4 = 1 | N 3 = N 2 = 2,N 1 = 1,r3
= {0,1}] − u4[h4 = 0 | N 3 = N 2
(36)
= 2,N 1 = 1, r3 = {0,1}]
= w(1 + 2α5) − α4 − α6[y − 2e1 − 2e12
− e11 − .5e2] − 2α7 − 2α72 − α71 − .25α8.

If we assume that some of these parameters are stochastic from the researcher’s perspective, then (36) can
serve as the basis for probability statements, namely that the probability that
a woman with a given wage and with
two non-twin children of the same sex
works is the probability that (36) is
positive.
To determine the impact of the sexratio on the probability of working net
of the effect of varying family size and
spacing, (36) can be compared to the
same utility difference when the sexratio is .5 (the only other possibility
with two children), namely

865

u4[h4 = 1 | N 3 = N 2 = 2,N 1 = 1, r3 = .5]
− u4[h4 = 0 | N 3 = N 2 = 2,N 1 = 1,r3
(37)
= .5] = w(1 + 2α5) − α4 − α6[y
− 2e1 − 2e12 − e11] − 2α7 − 2α72 − α71.

Subtracting (36) from (37) determines
the extent to which the utility gain to (or
loss from) working is affected by having
two non-twin children of the same sex as
opposed to two non-twin children of different sexes—the sex-composition effect
holding fertility constant. Denoting the
left hand side of (37) as u 4(1,0), this
difference is given by
∆u4(1,0)
| N 3 = N 2 = 2,N 1 = 1
∆r∗3
(38)
= .5α6e2 + .25α8,
where r∗t = r t – 0.5 is the absolute deviation of the period-t sex ratio from
0.5.55 As seen from (38), three parameters determine the magnitude of the sexsameness effect, α 6, α 8 and e 2. Thus, the
deviation from sex-sameness will affect
the labor supply decision, net of family
size effects, as long as either (i) the deviation from sex-sameness directly affects
the marginal utility of leisure (α8 ≠ 0) or
(ii) changes in sex-sameness affect the cost
of child rearing (e 2 ≠ 0) and consumption
and leisure are not strongly separable.
Conversely, in this model to assume that
sex-sameness does not affect the labor
supply decision directly as in AE requires that the child sex-composition and
leisure be strongly separable in the utility function and that either sex-sameness
not affect child costs or consumption and
leisure are strongly separable.56
55 Notice that this expression is independent of
the spacing of children, i.e., of whether there were
twins on the first birth, given the separability assumed between the sex-ratio and birth spacing in
utility and child-rearing cost functions.
56 As noted, birth spacing is ignored in the model
presented by RW. In the model referenced in AE
(1998) contained in their prior unpublished paper
(AE 1996), leisure and the sex-composition of children are separable, child costs are independent
of the sex composition of children and parental

866

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

Analogously, the effect on labor supply of having twins in the first birth as
opposed to two single births in the first
two periods, given the same sex-ratio, is
∆u4(1,0)
| N 3 = 2,r3 = α6e11 − α71, (39)
∆N 1
Thus, to assume that having twins in the
first birth does not affect the labor supply
decision directly as in RW requires that
birth spacing and leisure be strongly
separable in the utility function and that
either having twins does not affect child
costs or consumption and leisure are
strongly separable.
In this model, the impact of having
had an additional child on labor supply
for a given sex-ratio can be similarly assessed by comparing, say, the utility in
the final period associated with the
work decision when the woman has had
three children that are all of the same
sex and all single births with having
only two (non-twin) children of the
same sex. The fertility effect on this
utility difference is
∆u4(1,0)
| N 2 = N 1 = 1,r3 = {0,1}
∆N 3
(40)
= wα5 + α6(e1 − .25e2) − α7.
Fertility thus affects labor supply in the
model, for a given sex composition and
birth spacing, as long as either consumption and family size are non-separable,
consumption and leisure are nonseparable, or family size and leisure are
non-separable.57
Comparing (40) with (38) and (39), it
can be seen that it is possible, by ignoring the effect of twins and sex-sameness
consumption is fixed at zero. Sex-sameness, the
identifying instrument, does not appear as a specific measure in the model separate from sexcomposition.
57 In the model in AE (1996), fertility affects
labor supply directly by affecting child costs. This
is equivalent, as in the model here, to fertility and
leisure being non-separable in the utility function
(Pollak and Michael Wachter 1975).

on child costs and imposing separability
between the spacing and sex-composition
of children and leisure, for twins in the
first birth and for the sex-composition of
children to affect fertility but not labor
supply net of fertility while exogenous
variations in fertility affect labor supply
decisions. These assumptions are required
for using twins in the first birth or the
sex-composition of initial births as instruments to obtain an estimate that is equivalent to that of the effect of exogenous
variation in N on labor supply. 58
The Wald estimate of the labor supply response to an increase in the number of children based on an instrumental
variable x is
−
∆h4 / ∆x
,
−
∆N 3 / ∆x
where the numerator is the change in
the fraction of women who work due to
the change in x and the denominator is
the change in the mean number of children ever born due to the change in x. In
the case of studies using twins in the first
birth, ∆x = ∆N 1 represents the one additional child that is born. In AE, ∆x = ∆r 2
represents the sex ratio at the beginning
of the penultimate period, r 2. The sexsameness and twins first instrumental
variables estimates, assuming that (39)
and (40) are non-zero, are
−
−
∆h4 ⁄ ∆r∗2 ∆h4
=
−
− | r,N 1,N 2
∆N 3 ⁄ ∆r∗2 ∆N 3
−
−∗
∆r
∆h4
3
+ −∗ | N 3,N 2,N 2 × −
∆r3
∆N 3

(41)

58 The use of instrumental variables to estimate
the labor supply response to an additional child,
∆h 4/∆N 3, is predicated on the assumption that direct estimation, i.e., comparing the fraction of
working women among those with twins in the
first birth to those with single births or those with
two same-sex children to those with three samesex children, will give a biased estimate. This
would be the case, for example, if women who had
two children differed systematically from women
who had three children in any parameters that determine their labor supply.

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
and
−
−
∆h4 ⁄ ∆N 1 ∆h4
−
− = − | r,N 1,N 2
∆N3 ⁄ ∆N 1 ∆N 3
−
−
∆h4
∆N 3
.
+
| N 3,r ÷
∆N 1
∆N1

(42)

The first term in (41) and (42) is the
direct effect of a change in family size
on labor supply, the object of interest. The sex-sameness and twins first
instrumental variable estimates, however, each contain a second term if no
additional restrictions are imposed on
preferences and child costs. In the case
of sex-sameness, this second term arises
because having a third birth will in almost all cases also change the subsequent sex-ratio, and this may directly
affect both the marginal utility of leisure and child costs and thus labor supply. 59 In the case of twins, having two
children simultaneously may directly affect both the marginal utility of leisure
and child costs and thus labor supply. 60
Besides clarifying the multiplicity of
structural assumptions that are required
to justify the interpretation of the
instrumental-variable estimates based
59 For example, in the extreme case in which
only families with children of the same sex have an
additional child, approximately half could not exploit same-sex hand-me-down savings for this
additional child. Unless consumption and labor
supply are separable and ignoring the issue of
whether or not sex composition and leisure are
separable, as indicated by (41), the sex-sameness
instrumental-variable estimator confounds the direct effect of changing family size on labor supply
with the effect of also changing child costs for a
considerable proportion of women
60 AE also compare the sex-sameness instrumentalvariable estimate to that based on twins (in the
second birth) to draw inferences about the effects
of birth spacing. However, without the special restrictions on costs and on the utility function that
make expression (41) vanish, the comparison of
the sex-sameness estimate with that obtained
using twins as an instrument does not identify the
effect of birth spacing. If (41) and (42) were by
coincidence identical and non-zero, one would get
the same “biased” estimate of fertility effects on
labor supply.

867

on these natural experiments, the
model indicates the information that
would be useful in gauging their plausibility. Although providing credible estimates that would reveal whether specific commodities are separable or not
in the preference function is likely not
feasible, it is possible to examine the relationship between the sex-sameness of
children and child costs. We use unique
information from the same Indian data
set we used to examine the relationship
between permanent weather and family
labor time. These data provide for 4,896
rural households in 1982 household expenditures on clothing and footwear for
every child in the household, likely candidate commodities for which sex-specific
hand-me-down savings are possible.
India is a country well-known for
child sex-bias among parents. Parental
preferences for boys in India probably
dominate their concern for achieving a
balance in the sex ratio that Angrist and
Evans highlight for U.S. parents. This
preference at the household level reflects in part cost differentials by sex, as
in most parts of India a dowry must
be paid when daughters are married
(Behrman, Andrew Foster, Rosenzweig,
and Prem Vashishtha 1999). Thus, the
sex of children affects child-rearing costs
directly, as allowed for in the Angrist
and Evans’ two-stage least-squares estimates, and we would expect due to parental sex-bias that measures of the sexratio of the first two births will also affect
fertility in India, although perhaps in a
different way than in the United States.
However, in both countries the economies associated with sex-sameness from
the use of same-sex hand-me-downs
should be similar in kind if not in magnitude. The empirical issue is whether
child-rearing costs are also affected by
sameness, the identifying instrument.
As part of the sample survey, all
mothers aged 15 through 50 residing in

868

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)
TABLE 6
AVERAGE SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS:
RURAL INDIAN MOTHERS AGED 30–50 AND THEIR CHILDREN AGED 6–7
(NCAER REDS)
Mothers

Girls

Boys

Number of live children

4.51
(1.79)a

—

—

Average hours worked per day

4.67
(3.69)

—

—

Age

39.8
(5.37)

11.8
(3.27)

11.8
(3.29)

Per-child clothing expenditures (1982
rupees)

—

95.2
(175.9)

100.2
(121.8)

Per-child educational expenditures
(1982 rupees)

—

76.6
(371.9)

107.0
(230.1)

2,356

2,703

3,040

Number in sample
a Standard

deviation in parentheses.

the sampled households were interviewed to obtain a complete fertility
roster providing the birth dates, order,
sex, and survival status of each child
born, along with information on the average hours that the mothers worked in
a day in each of three crop seasons.
Each mother was also asked to provide
information on expenditures in the past
year for each child on clothing and footwear. Expenditures on education (books,
school fees, writing instruments) were
also provided. Unlike for clothes, however, as most Indian children attend
mixed-sex schools, the sex-sameness of
births should not affect cost savings
from hand-me-downs with respect to
educational expenditures. We should not
therefore expect to see sex-sameness
affect the patterns of these expenditures.
Table 6 provides descriptive statistics
for the sample of mothers aged 30–50
and their children of potential school
age. As can be seen, compared to countries like the United States, fertility is
very high in India—mothers aged 30 and
above in 1982 had 4.5 living children. Sex

discrimination is apparent in schooling
expenditures, which are on average almost 40 percent higher for boys in the
age range 6 through 17 than for similarly aged girls, a difference that is statistically significant at the .001 level. 61
Expenditures on clothing do not, however, differ significantly across boys and
girls in that age range. More importantly, for the purposes of examining
the relationship between changes in
child costs, fertility, and labor supply, it
can be seen that expenditures on children’s clothing are a non-trivial part of
the household budget in rural India. At
the time of the survey, the average
wage for rural male workers was 8.5 rupees per day, and that for women 6.7
rupees per day. For the average household in the sample, earnings are about
3000 rupees. For women aged 30
through 50 in the sample, there are on
61 Discrimination may as well be reflected in the
ratio of boys to girls—girls represent 47 percent of
all surviving children. There is evidence that this
disparity in part represents selective mortality
(Rosenzweig and Schultz 1982; Rose 1999).

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”

869

TABLE 7
NONPARAMETRIC, OLS, AND WALD ESTIMATES: SEX COMPOSITION OF FIRST TWO CHILDREN, LABOR SUPPLY, AND
FERTILITY, RURAL INDIAN WOMEN AGED 30–50a
(NCAER REDS)

Sample
Means
Dependent variable

Nonparametric ReducedForm Estimates

OLS Reduced-Form
Estimates, with
Restrictions

Wald
Estimate

Total
children

Hours
worked

Total
children

Hours
worked

Hours
worked

Girl/girl

.208

.386
(.114)b

–.169
(.228)

—

—

—

Boy/boy

.324

–.112
(.100)

–.301
(.206)

—

—

—

Boy/girl

.243

–.198
(.103)

.368
(.223)

—

—

—

Girl/girl or Boy/boy = 1

.532

—

—

.185
(.073)

–.441
(.154)

—

Total children

4.51

—

—

—

—

–2.38
(1.27)

Constant

—

4.51
(.076)

4.72
(.158)

4.41
(.052)

4.91
(.115)

15.4
(5.75)

F
(d.f., d.f.)

—

10.6
(3,2250)

3.68
(3,2250)

6.36
(1,2250)

8.24
(1,2250)

3.49
(1,2250)

a Number

of women = 2,356; number of households = 2,251.
errors in parentheses corrected for household clustering.

b Standard

average 2.4 children aged 6 through 17
residing in the household. Annual clothing expenditures on these school-aged
children thus represent 8 percent of income, and about 11 percent including
all children younger than 18.
The high fertility of the Indian
women means that the decision to have
a third child, examined by AE in the
context of the United States, is not as
critical a fertility decision. Indeed, in
the sample of mothers aged 30 and
above, 80 percent had at least three living children. However, the Indian data
indicate that, consistent with both sexbias and sex-sameness interpretations,
the sex-composition of the first two
(surviving) children has a significant effect on total fertility, as in the United
States. The first and second column of

estimates in Table 7 report nonparametric reduced-form estimates of the
relationship between the exhaustive
set of variables characterizing the sexcomposition of the first and second living children and total children and average hours worked per day by the
Indian sample mothers. The set of sexcomposition variables explains a statistically significant proportion of the variation of both variables, with mothers
with two girls as their first two children
having on average almost 1⁄2 more children than women who have both first and
second-born boys. Interestingly, mothers with two boys have both lower fertility and lower hours worked compared
with women who have two girls. However, imposing the restriction as in Angrist and Evans’ initial set of Wald

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

870

TABLE 8
OLS ESTIMATES OF SEX AND SAME-SEX “HAND-ME-DOWN” EFFECTS,
BY BIRTH ORDER AND EXPENDITURE TYPE: RURAL INDIAN CHILDREN AGED 6–17
(NCAER REDS)

Expenditure Type

Per-Child Clothing Expenditures

Per-Child Educational
Expenditures

Birth order of child

1

3

1

3

Has same-sex older sibling

—

–19.9
(9.34)

—

4.88
(13.6)

Child is a girl

0.729
(5.21)a

–10.1
(6.39)

–27.0
(10.6)

–43.0
(18.6)

Age

4.31
(.807)

4.72
(1.40)

8.84
(1.72)

8.14
(1.89)

Constant

42.8
(24.3)

92.9
(33.1)

116.9
(47.7)

177.7
(87.9)

F-statistic
(d.f., d.f.)

14.4
(2, 1718)

5.12
(3, 982)

15.4
(2, 1718)

8.88
(3, 982)

Number of mothers

1,878

1,023

1,878

1,023

Number of households

1,719

993

1,719

993

a Standard

errors in parentheses corrected for household clustering.

estimates that only sex-sameness matters for fertility yields results qualitatively similar to those from U.S. data:
Indian women with same-sex first and
second births have higher subsequent
fertility and lower hours worked (columns three and four), and the restrictive Wald estimate of the effect of total
children on labor supply, which makes
use of the same-sex exclusion restriction, is
negative and statistically significant (final
column).
The finding that the Wald estimate is
negative for sex-sameness, as we have
shown, does not indicate anything about
the structure of child costs, in particular of the absence of same-sex effects
on costs. A direct test of the existence
of same-sex hand-me-down cost savings
that is highlighted in the model is to assess whether there are lower clothing
expenditures among higher-parity children who have an older sibling of the
same sex. The illustrative model that we

have set out omits, however, the possibility that parents care about a child’s
sex per se or exogenous differences
in costs by sex. Identification of sexsameness effects from sex effects on
child costs is potentially a key issue
here, as it is in AE’s study of fertility
effects on labor supply. This is particularly so if in general girls impose higher
costs than boys, as is plausibly the case
in India. However, it is possible to separate sex preference and general sexspecific cost differential effects from
sex-sameness effects on clothing costs
by looking at the relationship between
the child’s sex and child-specific expenditures on clothing for first children.
Because same-sex hand-me-down cost
savings are irrelevant for first births,
the effect of the sex of the first child on
clothing costs only reflects either preferences, e.g., parents may prefer to
spend more on male children, or income effects, e.g., the birth of the male

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
child reduces lifetime income less than
does that of a female child.
Table 8 reports in the first column
the relationship between a child’s sex
and the child’s clothing costs for schoolage first children. As can be seen, there
is no statistically or economically significant effect of the child’s sex for
these children—families who have a
boy first compared with families who
have a girl first do not spend any more
or less on clothing for that first child.
This is consistent with the absence of
important sex-differentials in clothing
costs or income effects on clothing expenditures related to the sex-composition
of children. 62 In the second column of
Table 8, we report for order-three children the relationship between the
child’s clothing costs and whether or
not that child has an older sibling of the
same sex, controlling again for that
child’s sex and age. The estimates indicate that sex-sameness has a statistically
significant and substantial negative effect
on child costs for children aged 6–17; the
point estimate indicates among orderthree children clothing costs are 20 percent less for children with same-sex older
siblings compared with those children
without same-sex younger siblings. 63
62 Incorporating cost differentials in the technology of the model is straightforward and would
imply that sex-sameness effects on costs for
higher-order children would differ by sex. Allowing for sex-composition induced income effects on
child expenditures would entail enlarging the
model choice set. Consistent with the results for
first children, however, we could find no statistically significant difference in cost savings from
sex-sameness for boys or girls (p = .21). The data
thus do not suggest that either of these explorations would be empirically fruitful.
63 If there is heterogeneity in preferences for
girls and boys among households and this is reflected in differential survival, then these estimates are likely to understate savings from samesex births. This is because those households that
prefer more strongly boys or girls are more likely
to have surviving same-sex children compared
with households with a more mixed-sex composition. In that case the third child in a same-sex

871

What happens to the sex composition of
children when the third child is born
evidently matters for child costs. Given
that on average Indian families would
have two same-sex children, the existence
of these hand-me-down economies would
evidently save 40 rupees a year, or
slightly more than one week of full-time
work for women, 64 for a considerable
segment of the women’s life-cycle.
To assess whether the same-sex effect
for clothing is merely spurious and possibly reflective of complex but general
sex-composition effects not related to
hand-me-down savings, we estimate the
same specification for educational expenditures, for which, in India, the
scope for cost savings related to sexsameness would be relatively limited.
The educational expenditure estimates
for first children in column three of Table 8 indicate that, unlike for clothing,
having a boy first rather than a girl results in higher expenditures for the first
child, so that for this component of
child costs, sex composition evidently
matters. 65 However, consistent with the
absence of a cost advantage for school
expenditures that are related to sex
sameness, school expenditures on third
children, controlling for their sex and
age, are no different for those children
who have same-sex older siblings and
those who do not.
household will be on average in the preferred
group and thus may be provided with more resources. Note that the existence of preference heterogeneity for sex-ratios, even if there were no selective mortality as is presumably the case in the
United States, implies that the fertility variation
induced by exogenous variation in sex ratios would
reflect preference variation. In that case additional
restrictions on preferences would be required to
use sex-ratio variation as an instrument to identify
how additional children affect labor supply.
64 The average (8-hour) daily wage for women is
6.5 rupees as noted, and a standard work week is
six days.
65 This differential mainly reflects the fact that
boys attend school for more years than girls on
average in India.

872

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

That sex-sameness is related to expenditures on children’s clothing and to
educational expenditures in ways consistent with the existence of same-sex
hand-me-down cost economies suggests
that instrumental variable estimates of
the effect of fertility on labor supply
based on measures of sex sameness, as
used in Angrist and Evans, will in the
Indian context confound the effect of
an exogenous increase in children on
labor supply with direct child-rearing
cost effects on labor supply—the sex
composition of children plausibly alters
labor supply through mechanisms other
than through fertility change alone. Of
course, it is not possible to infer from
this evidence whether hand-me-down
economies associated with the sex-mix
of births are an important phenomenon
in the United States, the context in
which Angrist and Evans carried out
their empirical work. Even if child costs
were not importantly related to sexcomposition, one still has to make
strong assumptions about preferences
to obtain identification of fertility effects as interpreted in AE. These results suggest, however, that additional
data and theoretically grounded empirical work are required to better understand the relationship between fertility
choices and labor supply.
6. Conclusion
The pioneering studies that have exploited the natural experiments provided by nature clearly demonstrate the
potential value of these newly discovered tools. The contribution of these
studies, however, is not in providing
dramatically different results than obtained using more conventional approaches—most of the estimates are not
very different—nor in providing estimates that are conclusive. It is evident
that natural events used as instruments
do not provide estimates that can be

unambiguously interpreted, although
the range of possible alternative interpretations may have been reduced. We
have seen, for example, that the choice
of which natural events to use as an instrument matters—the use, for example, of date-of-birth as an instrument
for schooling attainment provides an estimate of schooling returns for a different segment of the population than
does the estimate based on gender as an
instrument for schooling, and each is
subject to a bias from the same misspecification that is of opposite sign.
Nor is there a breakthrough here that
obviates the need to specify behavioral
models and market structure, to take care
in measurement, or to pay attention to
matters of specification.
What then is the contribution and the
future for the natural natural experimental approach? The contribution is in
both focusing attention on the important matter of identification in a world
in which measurement of all relevant
characteristics of agents is impossible
and in drawing our attention to a set of
valuable tools, provided by nature, that
reduce the number of untestable assumptions required to obtain useful estimates. And, such gifts of nature may
also limit the range of possible alternative interpretations that could be given
to estimates obtained with them. Evidently, however, the potential for the
strictly natural natural experimental approach, which relies exclusively on natural events as instruments, is constrained
by the small number of random events
provided by nature and by the fact that
most outcomes of interest are the result
of many factors associated with preferences, technologies, and markets. And
the prospect of the discovery of new
and useful natural events is limited.
This is not to say that all natural events
have been exploited—the contrasts of
twin (first) birth effects that depend on

Rosenzweig and Wolpin: Natural “Natural Experiments”
whether the twins are both girls or boys
or mixed gender or identical have not
been used in any empirical studies to
our knowledge, and information based
on lightning strikes that destroy specific
facilities or stores could be employed to
draw inferences about optimal store or
facility location. 66
But it is clear that the number of
natural instruments will never be sufficient to eliminate the necessity of
imposing auxiliary assumptions or of
obtaining supplementary empirical information relevant to the assumptions
needed for identification. In combining
information on natural events within
the context of a coherent model that describes the behavior under study and
with supplementary empirical information on the model structure, such as on
technology or the extent of market completeness, future work can provide a
more solid foundation for further advancement of empirical knowledge.
Measurement without theory, however,
is not significantly more valuable than it
ever was before the use of natural natural
experiments.
REFERENCES
Angrist, Joshua D. 1990a. “Lifetime Earnings and
the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from
Social Security Administrative Records,” Amer.
Econ. Rev. 80:3, pp. 313–36.
——— . 1990b. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social
Security Administrative Records: Errata,”
Amer. Econ. Rev. 80:5, pp. 1284–86.
Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans. 1996.
“Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply:
Evidence From Exogenous Variation in Family
Size,” NBER (Cambridge MA) working paper
5778.
——— . 1998. “Children and Their Parent’s Labor
Supply: Evidence From Exogenous Variation in
Family Size,” Amer. Econ. Rev. 88:3, pp. 450–77.
66 Sean Ennis (1996) interprets the structural
damage from the Northridge earthquake of 1994
as an exogenous shock to hospital capacity in the
Los Angeles area. However, given the broad-based
effects of this natural event, it is difficult to believe that the effect of reduced hospital capacity
on prices is identified as is claimed in this study.

873

Angrist, Joshua and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does
Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and Earnings?” Quart. J. Econ. 106:4, pp.
979–1014.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan Krueger. 1994. “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
from a New Sample of Twins,” Amer. Econ.
Rev. 84:5, pp. 1157–74.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia Rouse. 1998. “Income, Schooling and Ability: Evidence from a
New Sample of Identical Twins,” Quart. J.
Econ. 113:1, pp. 253–84.
Becker, Gary S. and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On
the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of Children,” J. Polit. Econ. 81:2 pt. II, pp.
S279–88.
Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes. 1976. “Child
Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of
Children,” J. Polit. Econ. 84:4, pt. 2, pp. S143–
62.
Behrman, Jere R.; Andrew D. Foster, Mark R.
Rosenzweig, and Prem Vashishtha. 1999. “Female Schooling, Home Teaching, and Economic
Growth,” J. Polit. Econ. 107:4.
Behrman, Jere R.; Z. Hrubec, Paul Taubman, and
T. J. Wales. 1980. Socioeconomic Success: A
Study of the Effects of Genetic Endowments,
Family Environment and Schooling. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Behrman, Jere R.; Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul
Taubman. 1994. “Endowments and the Allocation of Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment,” J. Polit.
Econ. 102:6, pp. 1131–74.
Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 1999.
“ ‘Ability’ Biases in Schooling Returns and
Twins: A Test and New Estimates,” Econ. Educ.
Rev. 18:2, pp. 159–67.
Benjamin, Dwayne. 1992. “Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Testing for Separation in Agricultural Household
Models,” Econometrica, 60:2, pp. 287–322.
Bishop, John. 1976. “Reporting Errors and the
True Return to Schooling,” U. Wisconsin
mimeo.
Bound, John and David Jaeger. 1996. “On the Validity of Season of Birth as an Instrument in
Wage Equations: A Comment on Angrist &
Krueger’s ‘Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and Earnings,’ ” NBER
working paper W5835.
Bound, John and Gary Solon. 1988. “Double
Trouble: On the Value of Twins-Based Estimation of the Returns to Schooling,” NBER working paper W6721.
Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger. 1994. “The
Economic Consequences of Unwed Motherhood: Using Twins as a Natural Experiment,”
Amer. Econ. Rev. 84:5, pp. 1141–56.
Browning, Martin. 1992. “Children and Household
Economic Behavior,” J. Econ. Lit. 30:3, pp.
1434–75.
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Case. 1994. “The
Effect of Sibling Composition on Women’s

874

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVIII (December 2000)

Education and Earnings,” Quart. J. Econ. 109:3,
pp. 531–63.
Card, David. 1994. “Earnings, Schooling and Ability Revisited,” NBER (Cambridge) working paper 4832.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1977. “Education, Income,
and Ability Revisited,” J. Econometrics, 5:2, pp.
241–57.
Ennis, Sean. 1995. “The Northridge Earthquake:
A Natural Experiment in Market Structure,” U.
California Berkeley econ. dept. working paper
95/244.
Fleisher, Belton M. and George F. Rhodes. 1982.
“Fertility, Women’s Wage Rates, and Labor
Supply,” Amer. Econ. Rev. 69:1, pp. 14–24.
Gangadharan, Jaisri and Joshua Rosenbloom.
1996. “The Effects of Child-Bearing on Married
Women’s Labor Supply and Earnings: Using
Twin Births as a Natural Experiment,” NBER
working paper 5647.
Griliches, Z. 1979. “Sibling Models and Data in
Economics: Beginning of a Survey,” J. Polit.
Econ. 87:3 pt. II, pp. S37–S64.
Griliches, Zvi and William Mason. 1972. “Education, Income, and Ability,” J. Polit. Econ. 80:3
pt. II, pp. S74–S103.
Hearst, N.; J. W. Buehler, T. B. Newman, and
G. W. Rutherford. 1991. “The Draft Lottery
and AIDS—Evidence against Increased Intravenous Drug-Use by Vietnam-Era Veterans,”
Amer. J. Epidemiology, 134:5, pp. 522–25.
Hearst, N.; T. B. Newman, and S. B. Hulley. 1986.
“Delayed Effects of the Military Draft on Mortality—A Randomized Natural Experiment,”
New England J. Medicine, 314:10, pp. 620–
24.
Heckman, James. 1997. “Instrumental Variables,”
J. Human Resources, 32:3, pp. 441–62.
Imbens, Guido and Joshua Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 62:4, pp. 467–76.
Jacobsen, Joyce P.; James Wishart Pearce III, and
Joshua L. Rosenbloom. 1999. “The Effects of
Child-Bearing on Married Women’s Labor Supply and Earnings,” J. Human Resources, 34:3,
pp. 449–74.
Jacoby, Hanan and Emmanuel Skoufias. 1998.
“Testing Theories of Consumption Behavior
Using Information on Aggregate Shocks: Income Seasonality and Rainfall in Rural India,”
Amer. J. Agr. Econ. 80:1, pp. 1–14.
Kochar, Anjini. 1999. “Smoothing Consumption by
Smoothing Income: Hours-of-Work Responses
to Idiosyncratic Agricultural Shocks in Rural India,” Rev. Econ. Statist. 81:1, pp. 50–61.
McCourt K., T. J. Bouchard, David T. Lykken,
M. A. Tellegen, and M. Keyes. 1999. “Authoritarianism Revisited: Genetic and Environmental Influences Examined in Twins Reared
Apart and Together,” Personality Individual
Differences, 27:5, pp. 985–1014.
Miller, Paul; Charles Mulvey, and Nick Martin.

1995. “What Do Twins Studies Tell Us about
the Economic Returns to Education? A Comparison of US and Australian Findings,” Amer.
Econ. Rev., 85:3, pp. 586–99.
Mincer, Jacob. 1970. “The Distribution of Labor
Incomes: A Survey with Special Reference to
the Human Capital Approach,” J. Econ. Lit. 8:1,
pp. 1–26.
Paxson, Christina H. 1992. “Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of Savings to
Transitory Income in India,” Amer. Econ. Rev.
82:1, pp. 15–33.
Pollak, Robert A. 1969. “Conditional Demand
Functions and Consumption Theory,” Quart. J.
Econ. 83:1, pp. 60–78.
Pollak, Robert A. and Michael L. Wachter. 1975.
“The Relevance of the Household Production
Function and Its Implications for the Allocation
of Time,” J. Polit. Econ. 83:2, pp. 255–77.
Rose, Elaina. Forthcoming. “Ex Ante and Ex Post
Labor Supply Response to Risk in a Low Income Area,” J. Devel. Econ.
——— . 1999. “Consumption Smoothing and Excess Female Mortality in Rural India,” Rev.
Econ. Statist. 81:1, pp. 41–49.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. 1986. “Labor Markets in
Low Income Countries,” in Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 1. Hollis Chenery and
T. N. Srinivasan, eds. Amsterdam; New York
and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North Holland.
Rosenzweig Mark R. and Kenneth I Wolpin.
1980a. “Testing the Quality–Quantity Fertility
Model: The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment,” Econometrica, 48:1, pp. 227–40.
——— . 1980b. “Life Cycle Labor Supply and Fertility: Causal Inferences from Household Models,” J. Polit. Econ. 88:2, pp. 328–48.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz. 1982.
“Market Opportunities, Genetic Endowments,
and Intrafamily Resource Distribution: Child
Survival in Rural India,” Amer. Econ. Rev. 72:4,
pp. 803–15.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena. 1999. “Further Estimates of
the Economic Return to Schooling from a New
Sample of Twins,” Econ. Educ. Rev. 18:2, pp.
149–57.
Schultz, T. Paul. 1980. “Estimating Labor Supply
Functions for Married Women,” in Female Labor Supply: Theory and Estimation. James P.
Smith, ed. Princeton: Princeton U. Press, pp.
25–89.
Strauss, Richard S. 2000. “Adult Functional Outcomes of Those Born Small for Gestational
Age,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 283:5, pp. 625–32.
Wald, Abraham. 1940. “The Fitting of Straight
Lines If Both Variables Are Subject to Error,”
Annals Math. Statist. pp. 284–300.
Wolpin, Kenneth I. 1982. “A New Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis: The Impact of
Weather on the Income and Consumption of
Farm Households in India,” Int. Econ. Rev.
23:4, pp. 583–94.

This article has been cited by:
1. Noemi Peter, Petter Lundborg, Sara Mikkelsen, Dinand Webbink. 2018. The effect of a sibling’s
gender on earnings and family formation. Labour Economics 54, 61-78. [Crossref]
2. Matheus Albergaria, Maria Sylvia Saes. 2018. Measuring externalities in an information commons:
the case of libraries. Journal of Cleaner Production 192, 855-863. [Crossref]
3. Roger Lee Mendoza. 2018. Bringing the patient back in: behavioral decision-making and choice in
medical economics. Journal of Medical Economics 21:4, 313-317. [Crossref]
4. Helmut Farbmacher, Raphael Guber, Johan Vikström. 2018. Increasing the credibility of the twin
birth instrument. Journal of Applied Econometrics 33:3, 457-472. [Crossref]
5. Suzanne Bonner, Dipanwita Sarkar. 2018. The quality-quantity trade-off among Australian children.
Economic Modelling 70, 383-389. [Crossref]
6. Neel Rao, Twisha Chatterjee. 2018. Sibling gender and wage differences. Applied Economics 50:15,
1725-1745. [Crossref]
7. Luigi Minale. 2018. Agricultural productivity shocks, labour reallocation and rural–urban migration
in China. Journal of Economic Geography 60. . [Crossref]
8. François Libois, Vincent Somville. 2018. Fertility, household size and poverty in Nepal. World
Development 103, 311-322. [Crossref]
9. Chander Kant. 2018. Financial openness & institutions in developing countries. Research in
International Business and Finance . [Crossref]
10. Rufei Guo, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, Junsen Zhang. 2018. Fertility, household structure, and parental
labor supply: Evidence from China. Journal of Comparative Economics 46:1, 145-156. [Crossref]
11. Xiaohui Hou, Wanli Li. 2018. The Effects of Industrial Policy Support on IPO Performance: Evidence
from Listed Enterprises of the Chinese SMEs Board. Journal of Small Business Management 74. .
[Crossref]
12. Aelita Skarbalienė. 235. [Crossref]
13. Yi Fan, Junjian Yi, Ye Yuan, Junsen Zhang. 2018. The glorified mothers of sons: Evidence from
child sex composition and parental time allocation in rural China. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 145, 249-260. [Crossref]
14. Francesco Bogliacino, Cristiano Codagnone. 2017. Microfoundations, Behaviour, and Evolution:
Evidence from Experiments. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics . [Crossref]
15. Christian Belzil, Jorgen Hansen, Xingfei Liu. 2017. Dynamic skill accumulation, education policies,
and the return to schooling. Quantitative Economics 8:3, 895-927. [Crossref]
16. Melissa Adelman, Peter Holland, Tillmann Heidelk. 2017. Increasing Access by Waiving Tuition:
Evidence from Haiti. Comparative Education Review 61:4, 804-831. [Crossref]
17. Qigui Liu, Tianpei Luo, Gary Gang Tian. 2017. How do political connections cause SOEs and nonSOEs to make different M&A decisions/performance? Evidence from China. Accounting & Finance
44. . [Crossref]
18. Sara Cools, Simen Markussen, Marte Strøm. 2017. Children and Careers: How Family Size Affects
Parents’ Labor Market Outcomes in the Long Run. Demography 54:5, 1773-1793. [Crossref]

19. Mark E McGovern, Aditi Krishna, Victor M Aguayo, SV Subramanian. 2017. A review of the evidence
linking child stunting to economic outcomes. International Journal of Epidemiology 46:4, 1171-1191.
[Crossref]
20. Stefan Öberg. 2017. Too many is not enough: studying how children are affected by their number of
siblings and resource dilution in families. The History of the Family 22:2-3, 157-174. [Crossref]
21. James Bisbee, Rajeev Dehejia, Cristian Pop-Eleches, Cyrus Samii. 2017. Local Instruments, Global
Extrapolation: External Validity of the Labor Supply–Fertility Local Average Treatment Effect.
Journal of Labor Economics 35:S1, S99-S147. [Crossref]
22. Yasuyuki Sawada, Yoshito Takasaki. 2017. Natural Disaster, Poverty, and Development: An
Introduction. World Development 94, 2-15. [Crossref]
23. Giordano Palloni. 2017. Childhood health and the wantedness of male and female children. Journal
of Development Economics 126, 19-32. [Crossref]
24. Rufei Guo, Junjian Yi, Junsen Zhang. 2017. Family size, birth order, and tests of the quantity–quality
model. Journal of Comparative Economics 45:2, 219-224. [Crossref]
25. Samuel Bazzi. 2017. Wealth Heterogeneity and the Income Elasticity of Migration. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 9:2, 219-255. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
26. Winston Chou. 2017. Culture Remains Elusive. American Sociological Review 82:2, 435-443. [Crossref]
27. Steen Bengtsson, Nabanita Datta Gupta. 2017. Identifying the effects of education on the ability to
cope with a disability among individuals with disabilities. PLOS ONE 12:3, e0173659. [Crossref]
28. Sallie Keller, Gizem Korkmaz, Mark Orr, Aaron Schroeder, Stephanie Shipp. 2017. The Evolution of
Data Quality: Understanding the Transdisciplinary Origins of Data Quality Concepts and Approaches.
Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application 4:1, 85-108. [Crossref]
29. Sea-Jin Chang, Jaiho Chung. 2017. A quasi-experimental approach to the multinationalityperformance relationship: An application to learning-by-exporting. Global Strategy Journal 74. .
[Crossref]
30. Linbo Wang, James M. Robins, Thomas S. Richardson. 2017. On falsification of the binary
instrumental variable model. Biometrika asw064. [Crossref]
31. Richard J. Willke. Translating Comparative Effectiveness Research Evidence to Real-World Decision
Making: Some Practical Considerations 105-116. [Crossref]
32. Matthew T. Panhans, John D. Singleton. 2017. The Empirical Economist’s Toolkit. History of
Political Economy 49:Supplement, 127-157. [Crossref]
33. Solomon Asfaw, Federica Di Battista, Leslie Lipper. 2016. Agricultural Technology Adoption under
Climate Change in the Sahel: Micro-evidence from Niger. Journal of African Economies 25:5, 637-669.
[Crossref]
34. Myungho Paik, Bernard Black, David Hyman. 2016. Damage Caps and Defensive Medicine, Revisited.
Journal of Health Economics . [Crossref]
35. Anna Baranowska-Rataj, Anna Matysiak. 2016. The Causal Effects of the Number of Children on
Female Employment - Do European Institutional and Gender Conditions Matter?. Journal of Labor
Research 37:3, 343-367. [Crossref]
36. Pushkar Maitra, Sarmistha Pal, Anurag Sharma. 2016. Absence of Altruism? Female Disadvantage in
Private School Enrollment in India. World Development 85, 105-125. [Crossref]

37. ERIC FLOYD, JOHN A. LIST. 2016. Using Field Experiments in Accounting and Finance. Journal
of Accounting Research 54:2, 437-475. [Crossref]
38. Tomislav V. Kovandzic, Mark E. Schaffer, Lynne M. Vieraitis, Erin A. Orrick, Alex R. Piquero.
2016. Police, Crime and the Problem of Weak Instruments: Revisiting the “More Police, Less Crime”
Thesis. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 32:1, 133-158. [Crossref]
39. Jon P. Nelson, Amy D. McNall. 2016. Alcohol prices, taxes, and alcohol-related harms: A critical
review of natural experiments in alcohol policy for nine countries. Health Policy 120:3, 264-272.
[Crossref]
40. Jan Fidrmuc, Jarko Fidrmuc. 2016. Foreign languages and trade: evidence from a natural experiment.
Empirical Economics 50:1, 31-49. [Crossref]
41. David A. Savage. 2016. Surviving the Storm: Behavioural Economics in the Conflict Environment.
Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy 22:2. . [Crossref]
42. Tien Manh Vu, Hisakazu Matsushige. 2016. Gender, Sibling Order, and Differences in the Quantity
and Quality of Education: Evidence from Japanese Twins*. Asian Economic Journal 30:2, 147.
[Crossref]
43. Artem Edachev, Timur Natkhov, Leonid Polishchuk. 2016. War and Values. Problems of Economic
Transition 58:11-12, 1025. [Crossref]
44. Andrew S. Griffen, Makiko Nakamuro, Tomohiko Inui. 2015. Fertility and maternal labor supply
in Japan: Conflicting policy goals?. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 38, 52-72.
[Crossref]
45. Vicki Brown, Marj Moodie, Rob Carter. 2015. Congestion pricing and active transport – evidence
from five opportunities for natural experiment. Journal of Transport & Health 2:4, 568-579. [Crossref]
46. Andrew Buck, George Lady. 2015. A New Approach to Model Verification, Falsification and Selection.
Econometrics 3:3, 466-493. [Crossref]
47. Denise Stanley. 2015. CAN INTERNATIONAL TRANSFERS BE PROBLEMATIC?
HONDURAN REMITTANCES AND LABOR SUPPLY DECISIONS. Contemporary Economic
Policy 33:3, 550-570. [Crossref]
48. Prashant Bharadwaj. 2015. Fertility and rural labor market inefficiencies: Evidence from India. Journal
of Development Economics 115, 217-232. [Crossref]
49. Audun Langørgen. 2015. A structural approach for analyzing fiscal equalization. International Tax
and Public Finance 22:3, 376-400. [Crossref]
50. Charles G. Leathers, J. Patrick Raines, Heather R. Richardson-Bono. 2015. Natural experiments and
debt-driven financial crises: mortgage finance booms in the 1920s and 2000s. International Journal of
Social Economics 42:4, 340-355. [Crossref]
51. Jacob Gerner Hariri, Christian Bjørnskov, Mogens K. Justesen. 2015. Economic Shocks and Subjective
Well-Being: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment. The World Bank Economic Review lhv004. [Crossref]
52. Martin Huber. 2015. Testing the Validity of the Sibling Sex Ratio Instrument. LABOUR 29:1, 1-14.
[Crossref]
53. Valerio Bacak, Edward H. Kennedy. 2015. Marginal Structural Models: An Application to
Incarceration and Marriage During Young Adulthood. Journal of Marriage and Family 77:1, 112-125.
[Crossref]

54. Clément Carbonnier. Job Creation, Public Cost and the Distributive Profile of Tax Allowances for
Household Services in France 262-283. [Crossref]
55. Kate Baldwin, Rikhil R. Bhavnani. 2015. Ancillary Studies of Experiments: Opportunities and
Challenges. Journal of Globalization and Development 6:1. . [Crossref]
56. Tien Manh Vu. 2014. One male offspring preference: evidence from Vietnam using a split-population
model. Review of Economics of the Household 12:4, 689-715. [Crossref]
57. R.P. Young, M.A. Hudson, A.M.R. Terry, C.G. Jones, R.E. Lewis, V. Tatayah, N. Zuël, S.H.M.
Butchart. 2014. Accounting for conservation: Using the IUCN Red List Index to evaluate the impact
of a conservation organization. Biological Conservation 180, 84-96. [Crossref]
58. Bas van der Klaauw. 2014. From micro data to causality: Forty years of empirical labor economics.
Labour Economics 30, 88-97. [Crossref]
59. Laura Crespo, Pedro Mira. 2014. Caregiving to Elderly Parents and Employment Status of European
Mature Women. Review of Economics and Statistics 96:4, 693-709. [Crossref]
60. Paul R. Rosenbaum. Observational Study:Definition and Examples . [Crossref]
61. Donald P. Green, Amber D. Spry. 2014. Hate Crime Research. Journal of Contemporary Criminal
Justice 30:3, 228-246. [Crossref]
62. Martin Huber. 2014. Sensitivity checks for the local average treatment effect. Economics Letters 123:2,
220-223. [Crossref]
63. Richard Mussa. 2014. Impact of fertility on objective and subjective poverty in Malawi. Development
Studies Research 1:1, 202-222. [Crossref]
64. J. A. List, R. Metcalfe. 2014. Field experiments in the developed world: an introduction. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 30:4, 585. [Crossref]
65. P. Dolan, M. M. Galizzi. 2014. Getting policy-makers to listen to field experiments. Oxford Review
of Economic Policy 30:4, 725. [Crossref]
66. Emla Fitzsimons, Bansi Malde. 2014. Empirically probing the quantity–quality model. Journal of
Population Economics 27:1, 33-68. [Crossref]
67. G. W. Harrison. 2014. Cautionary notes on the use of field experiments to address policy issues.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 30:4, 753. [Crossref]
68. Glenn W Harrison. 2014. Impact Evaluation and Welfare Evaluation. The European Journal of
Development Research 26:1, 39-45. [Crossref]
69. Laura Cavalli. 2014. Does the Month of Birth Influence the Timing of Life Course Decisions?
Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Italy. Open Journal of Social Sciences 02:01, 101-118. [Crossref]
70. Qigui Liu, Jinghua Tang, Gary Gang Tian. 2013. Does political capital create value in the IPO market?
Evidence from China. Journal of Corporate Finance 23, 395-413. [Crossref]
71. Daniel S. Nagin, David Weisburd. 2013. Evidence and Public Policy. Criminology & Public Policy n/
a-n/a. [Crossref]
72. Robert J. Sampson, Christopher Winship, Carly Knight. 2013. Translating Causal Claims.
Criminology & Public Policy n/a-n/a. [Crossref]
73. A. Kotsadam, H. Finseraas. 2013. Causal Effects of Parental Leave on Adolescents' Household Work.
Social Forces 92:1, 329-351. [Crossref]

74. Clive R. Belfield, Inas Rashad Kelly. 2013. Early education and health outcomes of a 2001 U.S. Birth
Cohort. Economics & Human Biology 11:3, 310-325. [Crossref]
75. Glenn W. Harrison. 2013. Field experiments and methodological intolerance. Journal of Economic
Methodology 20:2, 103-117. [Crossref]
76. Margaret Gough, Mary Noonan. 2013. A Review of the Motherhood Wage Penalty in the United
States. Sociology Compass 7:4, 328-342. [Crossref]
77. Peter Siminski. 2013. Employment Effects of Army Service and Veterans' Compensation: Evidence
from the Australian Vietnam-Era Conscription Lotteries. Review of Economics and Statistics 95:1,
87-97. [Crossref]
78. John Ekberg, Rickard Eriksson, Guido Friebel. 2013. Parental leave — A policy evaluation of the
Swedish “Daddy-Month” reform. Journal of Public Economics 97, 131-143. [Crossref]
79. Suqin Ge. 2013. Estimating the returns to schooling: Implications from a dynamic discrete choice
model. Labour Economics 20, 92-105. [Crossref]
80. Daniel Rosenblum. 2013. The effect of fertility decisions on excess female mortality in India. Journal
of Population Economics 26:1, 147-180. [Crossref]
81. Mercy G. Mugo. 2012. Impact of Parental Socioeconomic Status on Child Health Outcomes in
Kenya**. African Development Review 24:4, 342-357. [Crossref]
82. Patrik Guggenberger, Gitanjali Kumar. 2012. On the size distortion of tests after an overidentifying
restrictions pretest. Journal of Applied Econometrics 27:7, 1138-1160. [Crossref]
83. Vegard Skirbekk, KC Samir. 2012. FERTILITY-REDUCING DYNAMICS OF WOMEN'S
SOCIAL STATUS AND EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT. Asian Population Studies 8:3, 251-264.
[Crossref]
84. Letícia J. Marteleto, Laetícia R. Souza. 2012. The Changing Impact of Family Size on Adolescents’
Schooling: Assessing the Exogenous Variation in Fertility Using Twins in Brazil. Demography 49:4,
1453-1477. [Crossref]
85. Peter E. Hilsenrath. 2012. Healthcare management education settings in the United States. Journal
of Management History 18:4, 386-401. [Crossref]
86. Kenneth A. Bollen. 2012. Instrumental Variables in Sociology and the Social Sciences. Annual Review
of Sociology 38:1, 37-72. [Crossref]
87. Ann-Zofie Duvander, Mats Johansson. 2012. What are the effects of reforms promoting fathers’
parental leave use?. Journal of European Social Policy 22:3, 319-330. [Crossref]
88. Richard Hornbeck. 2012. The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-Run
Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe. American Economic Review 102:4, 1477-1507. [Abstract]
[View PDF article] [PDF with links]
89. Jean-Louis Arcand, Matthias Rieger. 2012. Maternal height and the sex ratio. Journal of Evolutionary
Psychology 10:2, 69-81. [Crossref]
90. Malcolm B Coate, Jeffrey H Fischer. 2012. Why Can't We All Just Get Along? Structural Modelling
and Natural Experiments in Merger Analysis. European Competition Journal 8:1, 41-71. [Crossref]
91. Dionissi Aliprantis. 2012. Redshirting, Compulsory Schooling Laws, and Educational Attainment.
Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 37:2, 316-338. [Crossref]

92. Laura Zimmermann. 2012. Reconsidering Gender Bias in Intrahousehold Allocation in India. Journal
of Development Studies 48:1, 151-163. [Crossref]
93. Peter C. Reiss. 2011. Structural Workshop Paper —Descriptive, Structural, and Experimental
Empirical Methods in Marketing Research. Marketing Science 30:6, 950-964. [Crossref]
94. Richard E. Just. 2011. Behavior, Robustness, and Sufficient Statistics in Welfare Measurement. Annual
Review of Resource Economics 3:1, 37-70. [Crossref]
95. Daniel L. Millimet, Le Wang. 2011. Is the Quantity-Quality Trade-Off a Trade-Off for All, None,
or Some?. Economic Development and Cultural Change 60:1, 155-195. [Crossref]
96. Gilson Geraldino Silva-Jr. 2011. Market structure effects on wages in the Brazilian industrial firms.
Estudos Econômicos (São Paulo) 41:3, 521-536. [Crossref]
97. Florencia Torche. 2011. The Effect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a Natural
Experiment. Demography . [Crossref]
98. G. W. Harrison. 2011. Experimental methods and the welfare evaluation of policy lotteries. European
Review of Agricultural Economics 38:3, 335-360. [Crossref]
99. G. W. Harrison. 2011. Randomisation and Its Discontents. Journal of African Economies 20:4, 626-652.
[Crossref]
100. Nadir Altinok, Geeta Kingdon. 2011. New Evidence on Class Size Effects: A Pupil Fixed Effects
Approach*. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics no-no. [Crossref]
101. Yasuyuki Sawada, Satoshi Shimizutani. 2011. Changes in durable stocks, portfolio allocation, and
consumption expenditure in the aftermath of the Kobe earthquake. Review of Economics of the
Household . [Crossref]
102. Pablo Fajnzylber, William F. Maloney, Gabriel V. Montes-Rojas. 2011. Does formality improve microfirm performance? Evidence from the Brazilian SIMPLES program. Journal of Development Economics
94:2, 262-276. [Crossref]
103. Changhui Kang. 2011. Family Size and Educational Investments in Children: Evidence from Private
Tutoring Expenditures in South Korea*. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 73:1, 59-78.
[Crossref]
104. Jean Dubé, François Des Rosiers, Marius Thériault, Patricia Dib. 2011. Economic impact of a supply
change in mass transit in urban areas: A Canadian example. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice 45:1, 46-62. [Crossref]
105. John A. List, Imran Rasul. Field Experiments in Labor Economics 103-228. [Crossref]
106. Allison J. Sovey, Donald P. Green. 2011. Instrumental Variables Estimation in Political Science: A
Readers’ Guide. American Journal of Political Science 55:1, 188-200. [Crossref]
107. Eric French, Christopher Taber. Identification of Models of the Labor Market 537-617. [Crossref]
108. John DiNardo, David S. Lee. Program Evaluation and Research Designs 463-536. [Crossref]
109. Hans-Peter Kohler, Jere R. Behrman, Jason Schnittker. 2011. Social Science Methods for Twins
Data: Integrating Causality, Endowments, and Heritability. Biodemography and Social Biology 57:1,
88-141. [Crossref]
110. Richard E. Nelson. 2010. Testing the Fetal Origins Hypothesis in a developing country: evidence from
the 1918 Influenza Pandemic. Health Economics 19:10, 1181-1192. [Crossref]

111. Joshua Angrist, Victor Lavy, Analia Schlosser. 2010. Multiple Experiments for the Causal Link
between the Quantity and Quality of Children. Journal of Labor Economics 28:4, 773-824. [Crossref]
112. Kigon Nam. 2010. The Effect of Having More Children on Women's Labour Force Participation in
Korea: An Analysis Using Instrument Variables. LABOUR 24:3, 333-356. [Crossref]
113. Nabanita Datta Gupta, Mona Larsen. 2010. The impact of health on individual retirement plans: selfreported versus diagnostic measures. Health Economics 19:7, 792-813. [Crossref]
114. James J. Heckman. 2010. Building Bridges between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches
to Evaluating Policy. Journal of Economic Literature 48:2, 356-398. [Abstract] [View PDF article]
[PDF with links]
115. Markus Gangl. 2010. Causal Inference in Sociological Research. Annual Review of Sociology 36:1,
21-47. [Crossref]
116. Joshua D. Angrist,, Jörn-Steffen Pischke,. 2010. The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics:
How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics. Journal of Economic Perspectives
24:2, 3-30. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
117. Niklas Bengtsson. 2010. How responsive is body weight to transitory income changes? Evidence from
rural Tanzania☆. Journal of Development Economics 92:1, 53-61. [Crossref]
118. Raquel Bernal, Michael P. Keane. 2010. Quasi-structural estimation of a model of childcare choices
and child cognitive ability production. Journal of Econometrics 156:1, 164-189. [Crossref]
119. Michael P. Keane. 2010. Structural vs. atheoretic approaches to econometrics. Journal of Econometrics
156:1, 3-20. [Crossref]
120. David F. Larcker, Tjomme O. Rusticus. 2010. On the use of instrumental variables in accounting
research☆. Journal of Accounting and Economics 49:3, 186-205. [Crossref]
121. Rachel Milstein Sondheimer, Donald P. Green. 2010. Using Experiments to Estimate the Effects of
Education on Voter Turnout. American Journal of Political Science 54:1, 174-189. [Crossref]
122. J. Dinardo. Natural Experiments and Quasi-Natural Experiments 139-153. [Crossref]
123. Samir KC, Bilal Barakat, Anne Goujon, Vegard Skirbekk, Wolfgang Lutz. 2010. Projection of
populations by level of educational attainment, age, and sex for 120 countries for 2005-2050.
Demographic Research 22, 383-472. [Crossref]
124. Raj Chetty. 2009. Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods. Annual Review of Economics 1:1, 451-488. [Crossref]
125. Joel Sobel. 2009. Neuroeconomics: A Comment on Bernheim. American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 1:2, 60-67. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
126. Meltem Dayioğlu, Murat G. Kirdar, Aysit Tansel. 2009. Impact of Sibship Size, Birth Order and Sex
Composition on School Enrolment in Urban Turkey. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 71:3,
399-426. [Crossref]
127. Jasjeet S. Sekhon. 2009. Opiates for the Matches: Matching Methods for Causal Inference. Annual
Review of Political Science 12:1, 487-508. [Crossref]
128. Weili Ding, Steven F. Lehrer, J.Niels Rosenquist, Janet Audrain-McGovern. 2009. The impact of poor
health on academic performance: New evidence using genetic markers. Journal of Health Economics
28:3, 578-597. [Crossref]

129. Y SAWADA, M LOKSHIN. 2009. Obstacles to school progression in rural Pakistan: An analysis of
gender and sibling rivalry using field survey data☆. Journal of Development Economics 88:2, 335-347.
[Crossref]
130. Eric Maurin,, Julie Moschion. 2009. The Social Multiplier and Labor Market Participation of
Mothers. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1:1, 251-272. [Abstract] [View PDF article]
[PDF with links]
131. Jungho Kim, Henriette Engelhardt, Alexia Prskawetz, Arnstein Aassve. 2009. Does fertility decrease
household consumption?. Demographic Research 20, 623-656. [Crossref]
132. Paolo Buccirossi, Lorenzo Ciari, Tomaso Duso, Sven-Olof Fridolfsson, Giancarlo Spagnolo, Cristiana
Vitale. 2008. A Short Overview of a Methodology for the Ex-Post Review of Merger Control
Decisions. De Economist 156:4, 453-475. [Crossref]
133. Joseph Lee Rodgers, Hans‐Peter Kohler, Matt McGue, Jere R. Behrman, Inge Petersen, Paul
Bingley, Kaare Christensen. 2008. Education and Cognitive Ability as Direct, Mediating, or Spurious
Influences on Female Age at First Birth: Behavior Genetic Models Fit to Danish Twin Data. American
Journal of Sociology 114:S1, S202-S232. [Crossref]
134. Stephen L. Morgan, Jennifer J. Todd. 2008. 6. A Diagnostic Routine for the Detection of
Consequential Heterogeneity of Causal Effects. Sociological Methodology 38:1, 231-282. [Crossref]
135. Futoshi Yamauchi. 2008. Early Childhood Nutrition, Schooling, and Sibling Inequality in a Dynamic
Context: Evidence from South Africa. Economic Development and Cultural Change 56:3, 657-682.
[Crossref]
136. YASUYUKI SAWADA, SATOSHI SHIMIZUTANI. 2008. How Do People Cope with Natural
Disasters? Evidence from the Great Hanshin-Awaji (Kobe) Earthquake in 1995. Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 40:2-3, 463-488. [Crossref]
137. T. Dunning. 2008. Model Specification in Instrumental-Variables Regression. Political Analysis 16:3,
290-302. [Crossref]
138. Ricardo Godoy, Victoria Reyes-Garc?a, Susan Tanner, William R. Leonard, Thomas W. McDade,
Tom?s Huanca. 2008. Can We Trust an Adult's Estimate of Parental School Attainment?
Disentangling Social Desirability Bias and Random Measurement Error. Field Methods 20:1, 26-45.
[Crossref]
139. T. Paul Schultz. Fertility in Developing Countries 1-7. [Crossref]
140. J. DiNardo. Natural Experiments and Quasi-Natural Experiments 1-12. [Crossref]
141. Daniel E. Ho, Kosuke Imai. 2008. Estimating Causal Effects of Ballot Order from a Randomized
Natural Experiment. Public Opinion Quarterly 72:2, 216-240. [Crossref]
142. Hua Xu, Sock Hwan Lee, Tae Ho Eom. Introduction to Panel Data Analysis . [Crossref]
143. Ricardo Godoy, Victoria Reyes-García, Vincent Vadez, William R. Leonard, Elizabeth Byron. 2007.
How Well do Foragers Protect Food Consumption? Panel Evidence from a Native Amazonian Society
in Bolivia. Human Ecology 35:6, 723-732. [Crossref]
144. Peter J. Glick, Alessandra Marini, David E. Sahn. 2007. Estimating the Consequences of Unintended
Fertility for Child Health and Education in Romania: An Analysis Using Twins Data. Oxford Bulletin
of Economics and Statistics 69:5, 667-691. [Crossref]
145. Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello. 2007. Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility, and Corporate
Investment. Review of Financial Studies 20:5, 1429-1460. [Crossref]

146. John Giles, Kyeongwon Yoo. 2007. Precautionary Behavior, Migrant Networks, and Household
Consumption Decisions: An Empirical Analysis Using Household Panel Data from Rural China.
Review of Economics and Statistics 89:3, 534-551. [Crossref]
147. Olivier Deschênes. 2007. Estimating the Effects of Family Background on the Return to Schooling.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 25:3, 265-277. [Crossref]
148. Máire Ní Bhrolcháin, Tim Dyson. 2007. On Causation in Demography: Issues and Illustrations.
Population and Development Review 33:1, 1-36. [Crossref]
149. Z ECKSTEIN, G VANDENBERG. 2007. Empirical labor search: A survey. Journal of Econometrics
136:2, 531-564. [Crossref]
150. John Strauss, Duncan Thomas. Chapter 54 Health over the Life Course 3375-3474. [Crossref]
151. T. Paul Schultz. Chapter 52 Population Policies, Fertility, Women's Human Capital, and Child Quality
3249-3303. [Crossref]
152. Jaap H. Abbring, James J. Heckman. Chapter 72 Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part
III: Distributional Treatment Effects, Dynamic Treatment Effects, Dynamic Discrete Choice, and
General Equilibrium Policy Evaluation 5145-5303. [Crossref]
153. Hidehiko Ichimura, Petra E. Todd. Chapter 74 Implementing Nonparametric and Semiparametric
Estimators 5369-5468. [Crossref]
154. Martin Ravallion. Chapter 59 Evaluating Anti-Poverty Programs 3787-3846. [Crossref]
155. Germano Mwabu. Chapter 53 Health Economics for Low-Income Countries 3305-3374. [Crossref]
156. Dean Yang, HwaJung Choi. 2007. Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall Shocks in the
Philippines. The World Bank Economic Review 21:2, 219-248. [Crossref]
157. Nobuhiko FUWA, Seiro ITO, Kensuke KUBO, Takashi KUROSAKI, Yasuyuki SAWADA. 2006.
GENDER DISCRIMINATION, INTRAHOUSEHOLD RESOURCE ALLOCATION, AND
IMPORTANCE OF SPOUSES’ FATHERS: EVIDENCE ON HOUSEHOLD EXPENDITURE
FROM RURAL INDIA. The Developing Economies 44:4, 398-439. [Crossref]
158. Seiro ITO. 2006. RAISING EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT OF THE POOR: POLICIES AND
ISSUES. The Developing Economies 44:4, 500-531. [Crossref]
159. J GILES. 2006. Is life more risky in the open? Household risk-coping and the opening of China's
labor markets. Journal of Development Economics 81:1, 25-60. [Crossref]
160. John Hobcraft. 2006. The ABC of demographic behaviour: How the interplays of alleles, brains,
and contexts over the life course should shape research aimed at understanding population processes.
Population Studies 60:2, 153-187. [Crossref]
161. H KAZIANGA, C UDRY. 2006. Consumption smoothing? Livestock, insurance and drought in rural
Burkina Faso. Journal of Development Economics 79:2, 413-446. [Crossref]
162. Jared C. Carbone, Daniel G. Hallstrom, V. Kerry Smith. 2006. Can Natural Experiments Measure
Behavioral Responses to Environmental Risks?. Environmental & Resource Economics 33:3, 273-297.
[Crossref]
163. H KAZIANGA. 2006. Motives for household private transfers in Burkina Faso. Journal of Development
Economics 79:1, 73-117. [Crossref]
164. Pierre Lefebvre. 2006. Discrimination sexuelle dans les dépenses des ménages : survol de la littérature
et évidences empiriques pour le Canada. L'Actualité économique 82:1-2, 119. [Crossref]

165. Paul J. Ferraro, Subhrendu K. Pattanayak. 2006. Money for Nothing? A Call for Empirical Evaluation
of Biodiversity Conservation Investments. PLoS Biology 4:4, e105. [Crossref]
166. Nabanita Gupta, Amaresh Dubey. 2006. Fertility and the household's economic status: A natural
experiment using Indian micro data. The Journal of Development Studies 42:1, 110-138. [Crossref]
167. Mingliang Li. 2006. High school completion and future youth unemployment: new evidence from
High School and Beyond. Journal of Applied Econometrics 21:1, 23-53. [Crossref]
168. Paul Glewwe, Michael Kremer. Chapter 16 Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes in Developing
Countries 945-1017. [Crossref]
169. Michael Bromwich. Economics in Management Accounting 137-162. [Crossref]
170. Wolfgang Lutz, Vegard Skirbekk. 2005. Policies Addressing the Tempo Effect in Low-Fertility
Countries. Population and Development Review 31:4, 699-720. [Crossref]
171. Michael E. Sobel. 2005. Discussion: 'The Scientific Model of Causality'. Sociological Methodology 35:1,
99-133. [Crossref]
172. David Newhouse. 2005. The Persistence of Income Shocks: Evidence from Rural Indonesia. Review
of Development Economics 9:3, 415-433. [Crossref]
173. Michael E. Sobel. 2005. Discussion: ‘The Scientific Model of Causality’. Sociological Methodology 35:1,
99-133. [Crossref]
174. Futoshi Yamauchi. 2005. Why Do Schooling Returns Differ? Screening, Private Schools, and Labor
Markets in the Philippines and Thailand. Economic Development and Cultural Change 53:4, 959-981.
[Crossref]
175. Ian J. Bateman, Roy Brouwer, Stavros Georgiou, Nick Hanley, Fernando Machado, Susana Mourato,
Caroline Saunders. 2005. A ?Natural Experiment? Approach to Contingent Valuation of Private and
Public UV Health Risk Reduction Strategies in Low and High Risk Countries. Environmental &
Resource Economics 31:1, 47-72. [Crossref]
176. Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. The More the Merrier? The Effect of
Family Size and Birth Order on Children's Education*. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120:2, 669-700.
[Crossref]
177. SUSAN GODLONTON, MALCOLM KESWELL. 2005. THE IMPACT OF HEALTH ON
POVERTY: EVIDENCE FROM THE SOUTH AFRICAN INTEGRATED FAMILY SURVEY.
The South African Journal of Economics 73:1, 133-148. [Crossref]
178. Daniel M. Bernhofen, John C. Brown. 2005. An Empirical Assessment of the Comparative Advantage
Gains from Trade: Evidence from Japan. American Economic Review 95:1, 208-225. [Abstract] [View
PDF article] [PDF with links]
179. Donald P. Green, Alan S. Gerber. Field Experimentation 19-24. [Crossref]
180. Rodney Ramcharan. 2005. How Big Are the Benefits of Economic Diversification? Evidence From
Earthquakes. IMF Working Papers 05:48, 1. [Crossref]
181. Rodney Ramcharan. 2005. Cataclysms and Currencies: Does the Exchange Rate Regime Matter for
Real Shocks?. IMF Working Papers 05:85, 1. [Crossref]
182. Glenn W. Harrison, John A. List. 2004. Field Experiments. Journal of Economic Literature 42:4,
1009-1055. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]

183. Haizheng Li, Yi Luo. 2004. Reporting errors, ability heterogeneity, and returns to schooling in China.
Pacific Economic Review 9:3, 191-207. [Crossref]
184. T Joyce. 2004. Un-assured instruments: a comment on “insurance and the utilization of medical
services”. Social Science & Medicine 58:9, 1633-1634. [Crossref]
185. Christian Belzil. 2004. Un modèle économétrique dynamique de l’abandon scolaire au Québec et en
Ontario. L'Actualité économique 80:2-3, 363. [Crossref]
186. Deborah A. Cobb-Clark, Thomas Crossley. 2003. Econometrics for Evaluations: An Introduction to
Recent Developments. Economic Record 79:247, 491-511. [Crossref]
187. B Cockx. 2003. The demand for physician services Evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of
Health Economics 22:6, 881-913. [Crossref]
188. Robert Moffitt. 2003. Causal Analysis in Population Research: An Economist's Perspective. Population
and Development Review 29:3, 448-458. [Crossref]
189. M Gurgand. 2003. Farmer education and the weather: evidence from Taiwan (1976–1992). Journal of
Development Economics 71:1, 51-70. [Crossref]
190. Ludger Wößmann. 2003. Returns to education in Europe. Review of World Economics 139:2, 348-376.
[Crossref]
191. Steven M. Shugan. 2002. In Search of Data: An Editorial. Marketing Science 21:4, 369-377. [Crossref]
192. Steffen L. Lauritzen, Thomas S. Richardson. 2002. Chain graph models and their causal
interpretations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 64:3, 321-348.
[Crossref]
193. 2002. Discussion on the paper by Lauritzen and Richardson. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Statistical Methodology) 64:3, 348-361. [Crossref]
194. Paul Glewwe. 2002. Schools and Skills in Developing Countries: Education Policies and
Socioeconomic Outcomes. Journal of Economic Literature 40:2, 436-482. [Abstract] [View PDF
article] [PDF with links]
195. Jean M. Mitchell, Jonathan H. Sunshine. 2002. Determinants of Differences Among Radiologists in
Starting Salaries. American Journal of Roentgenology 178:5, 1067-1073. [Crossref]
196. Hidehiko Ichimura, Christopher Taber. 2002. Semiparametric Reduced-Form Estimation of Tuition
Subsidies. American Economic Review 92:2, 286-292. [Citation] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
197. Marco Francesconi. 2002. A Joint Dynamic Model of Fertility and Work of Married Women. Journal
of Labor Economics 20:2, 336-380. [Crossref]
198. Donald P. Green, Alan S. Gerber. 2002. The Downstream Benefits of Experimentation. Political
Analysis 10:04, 394-402. [Crossref]
199. Joshua D. Angrist,, Alan B. Krueger. 2001. Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identification:
From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments. Journal of Economic Perspectives 15:4, 69-85.
[Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]

