Fr a n c i s G a l t o n a n d r e g r e s s i o n t o t h e m e a n

Galton founded many concepts in statistics, among them correlation, quartile, and percentile. Here Stephen Senn
examines one of Galton’s most important statistical legacies – one that is at once so trivial that it is blindingly
obvious, and so deep that many scientists spend their whole career being fooled by it.
Galton was born into a wealthy family. The
youngest of nine children, he appears to have
been a precocious child – in support of which his
biographer cites the following letter from young
Galton, dated February 15th, 1827, to one of his
sisters:
My dear Adèle,
I am four years old and can read any
English book. I can say all the Latin Substantives and adjectives and active words
besides 52 lines of Latin poetry. I can cast
up any sum in addition and multiply by
2,3,4,5,6,7,8,(9),10,(11)
I can also say the pence table, I read
French a little and I know the clock.

stand the meaning of data. Galton was a brilliant
natural statistician.
Many words in our statistical lexicon were
coined by Galton. For example, correlation and
deviate are due to him, as is regression, and he
was the originator of terms and concepts such
as quartile, decile and percentile, and of the use
of median as the midpoint of a distribution2. Of

Galton compared the height of
children to that of their parents.
He found that adult children are
closer to average height than
their parents are.

Francis Galton1
Apparently Galton was also a truthful child, since,
having written the letter, he had realised that
what he had claimed about the numbers 9 and
11 was not quite true and had tried to obliterate
them. And before you get too impressed, his
birthday was February 16th so he was very nearly
five!
Galton’s later progress in education was
not quite so smooth. He dabbled in medicine
and then read mathematics at Cambridge, but
eventually had to take a pass degree. In fact he
subsequently freely acknowledged his weakness
in formal mathematics, but this weakness was
compensated by an exceptional ability to under-

124

september2011

course, words have a way of developing a life
of their own, so that, unfortunately decile is
increasingly being applied to mean tenth. There
are, pretty obviously, ten tenths of a distribution, but there are, slightly less obviously, only
nine deciles, since the deciles are the boundaries
between the tenths. To use decile to mean tenth
– as when, for example, speaking of students “in
the top decile” (according to their examination
marks) – is not only pompous but also wrong
and means that yet another word will eventually
have to be invented to perform the function that
Galton created decile to fulfil.
To take another example, we no longer use
the term regression in quite the way Galton did.

We now usually reserve it for the fitting of linear
relationships. In Galton’s usage regression was a
phenomenon of bivariate distributions – those
involving two variables - and something he discovered through his studies of heritability. However, the use of regression in Galton’s sense does
survive in the phrase regression to the mean – a
powerful phenomenon it is the purpose of this
article to explain.
Galton first noticed it in connection with
his genetic study of the size of seeds, but it is
perhaps his 1886 study of human height3 that
really caught the Victorian imagination. Galton
had compared the height of adult children to the
heights of their parents.
For this purpose he had multiplied the heights
of female children by 1.08. For as he put it:
In every case I transmuted the female
statures to their corresponding male
equivalents and used them in their
transmuted form, so that no objection
grounded on the sexual difference of
stature need be raised when I speak of
averages.
It is interesting to note, incidentally, that he
also considered whether 1.07 or 1.09 might not
be a better factor to use, but remarked:
The final result is not of a kind to be
affected by these minute details, for
it happened that, owing to a mistaken
direction, the computer to whom I first
entrusted the figures used a somewhat

© 2011 The Royal Statistical Society

75
70
60

65

Midparent height (inches)

75
70
65
60

Child height (inches)

60

65

70

75

Mid-parent height (inches)

60

65

70

75

Child height (inches)

Figure 1. Galton’s height data: two scatterplots showing the regression phenomenon (drawn from data listed at
http://www.math.uah.edu/stat/data/Galton.txt)

different factor, yet the result came out
closely the same.
The year being 1886 the computer in question
was, of course, a human and not an electronic
assistant! The more interesting point,
however, is that Galton is describing what we
would now call robustness in statistics – and,
simultaneously, provides an early example of
what is now recognised as a general scientific
phenomenon: scientists never seem to fail the
robustness checks they report. It is interesting
to speculate why.
Galton’s data consisted of 928 adult children
and 205 “parentages” – that is to say, fatherand-mother couples. (The mean number of children per couple was thus just over 4.5 – families
were larger in those days.) He represented the
height of parents using a single statistic, the
“mid-parent”, this being the mean of the height
of the father and of his wife’s height multiplied
by 1.08. Of course, as previously noted, for the
female children the heights were also multiplied
by 1.08. For the male children they were unadjusted.
Figure 1 is a modern graphical representation of Galton’s data. Galton had grouped his
results by intervals of 1 inch, and in consequence, if a given child’s recorded height were
plotted against its recorded mid-parent height,
many points would be superimposed on top of
each other. I have added a small amount of “jitter” in either dimension to separate the points,
which are shown in blue. The data are plotted
in two ways: child against mid-parent on the
left and mid-parent against child on the right.
The thin solid black diagonal line in each case
is the line of equality. If a point lies on this
line then child and mid-parent were identical in
height. Also shown in red in each case are two

different approaches one might use to predicting “output” from “input”. The dashed line is
the least squares fit, what we now (thanks to
Galton) call a regression line. The thick red line
is a more local fit, in fact a so-called LOWESS
(or locally weighted scatterplot smoothing)
line. The point about either of these two approaches – irrespective of whether we predict
child from mid-parent or vice versa – is that
the line that is produced is less steep than the
line of exact equality. The consequence is that
we may expect that an adult child is closer
to average height than its parents – but also,
paradoxically, that parents are closer to average
height than is their child.
The first part we might expect. The second
may seem absurd – but is just as true. I will say
it again: a tall child will have parents, on average, less tall than himself. This particular point
is both deep and trivial. It is deep because the
first time that students encounter it (I can still
remember my own reaction) they assume that it
is wrong; its truth is well hidden. Once understood, however, it becomes so obvious that one
is amazed at how regularly it is overlooked. It is
a point not about genetics but about statistics.
In fact I am confident that at this stage I
can divide my readers into two: those who will
claim that I am wasting their time repeating a
hackneyed truth, and those who will say that I
have so far failed in anything that I have said to
show that the hackney in question is a genuine
carriage. So I will say farewell to the members
of the first group and address myself to the second – but before I say goodbye to the first I
will ask them one question. Do you think that
there is good evidence that the placebo effect is
genuine? If so, stick around for a while because I
will try and show you that you (and ten thousand
physicians with you) are wrong. What this has to

do with Francis Galton will be revealed in due
course.
So let us leave Francis Galton for the moment and consider another example, this time a
simulated one. Figure 2 shows simulated values
in diastolic blood pressure (DBP) for a group
of 1000 individuals measured on two occasions:
at baseline and at outcome. (“Outcome” simply
means “some time later”; they have not received any medical treatment between the two
occasions.) If your blood pressure is high, you
are hypertensive. Using a common but arbitrary
definition of hypertension as a diastolic pressure of 95 mmHg or more, the subjects have
been classified as consistently hypertensive
(red diamonds) consistently normotensive (blue
circles) or inconsistent – hypertensive on one
occasion, normal on the other (orange stars).
The distributions at outcome and baseline are
very similar, with means close to 90 mmHg and
a spread that can be defined by that Galtonian
statistic, the inter-quartile range, as being close
to 11 mmHg on either occasion. In other words,
what the picture shows is a population that all
in all has not changed over time although,
since the correlation (to use another Galtonian
term) is just under 0.8 and therefore less than
1, there is, of course, variability over time for
many individuals. Some have increased their
blood pressure between the measurements,
some have reduced it.
However, in the setting of many clinical trials, Figure 2 is not a figure we would see. The
reason is simple: we would not follow up individuals who were observed to be normotensive
at baseline. If you are “healthy”, we would not
bother to call you back for the second test. In-

Figure 2. Simulated diastolic blood pressure for 1000
patients measured on two occasions – blue circles,
normotensive on both occasions; red diamonds,
hypertensive on both occasions; orange stars,
inconsistent

september2011

125

stead what doctors and medics see is the picture
given in Figure 3. Of the 1000 subjects seen
at baseline, 285 had DBP values in excess of
95 mmHg. We did not bother to call the other
715 back; we concentrated instead on those we
deemed to have a medical problem – and those
are the only ones shown in the figure. And if now
we compare the outcome values of those 285
subjects we have left to the values they showed
at baseline, we will find that mean DBP seems
to have gone down. At outcome it is more than
2 mmHg lower than it was at baseline. What we
have just observed is what Francis Galton called
regression to the mean.
There has been an apparent spontaneous
improvement in blood pressure. Apparently many
patients who were hypertensive at baseline
became normotensive. It is important to understand here that this observed “improvement” is
a consequence of this stupid (but very common)
way of looking at the data. It arises because of
the way we select the values. What is missing
because of our selection method is bad news. We
can only see patients who remain hypertensive
or who become normotensive. We left out the
patients who were normotensive but became
hypertensive. They are shown in Figure 4. If we
had their data they would correct the misleading
picture in Figure 3, but the way we have gone
about our study means that we will not see their
outcome values.
Regression to the mean is a consequence of
the observation that, on average, extremes do
not survive. In our height example, extremely
tall parents tend to have children who are taller
than average and extremely small parents tend
to have children who are smaller than average,
but in both cases the children tend to be closer
to the average than were their parents. If that
were not the case the distribution of height

Figure 3. Diastolic blood pressure on two occasions
for patients observed to be hypertensive at baseline

126

september2011

would have to get wider over time. Of course
there can be changes in such distributions over
time and it is the case that people are taller
now than in Galton’s day, but this is a separate
phenomenon in addition to regression to the
mean.
However, regression to the mean is not restricted to height nor even to genetics. It can
occur anywhere where repeated measurements
are taken.
Does it happen that scientists get fooled
by Galton’s regression to the mean? All the
time! Right this moment all over the world
in dozens of disciplines, scientists are fooling themselves either by not having a control
group, which would also show the regression
effect, or, if they do have a control group, by
concentrating on the differences within groups
between outcome and baseline rather than the
differences between groups at outcome. It is
regression to the mean that is a very plausible
explanation for the placebo effect, since entry
into clinical trials is usually only by virtue of an
extreme baseline value. This does not matter as
long as you compare the treated group to the
placebo group, since both groups will regress
to the mean. It does mean, however, that you
have to be very careful before claiming that any
improvement in the placebo group is due to the
healing hands of the physician or psychological
expectancy.
To prove that would require a three-arm trial:
an active group, a placebo group and a group
given nothing at all. Then all three groups would
have the same regression to the mean improvement and differences between the placebo and
the open arm could be judged to be due to a true
placebo effect. Not surprisingly, very few such
trials have been run. However, analysis of those
that have been run suggests that only in the

Figure 4. Patients from Figure 2 who were normotensive
at baseline but hypertensive at outcome

area of pain control do we have reliable evidence
of a placebo effect4,5.
But regression to the mean is not just limited to clinical trials. Did you choose dangerous
road intersections in your region for corrective
engineering work based on their record of traffic
accidents? Did you fail to have a control group
of similar black spots that went untreated? Are
you going to judge efficacy of your intervention by comparing before and after? Then you
should know that Francis Galton’s regression to
the mean predicts that sacrificing a chicken on

Do scientists get fooled by Galton’s
regression to the mean? All the time!

such black spots can be shown to be effective
by the methods you have chosen6. Did you give
failing students a remedial class and did they
improve again when tested? Are you sure that
subsequence means consequence? What have
you overlooked?
A Victorian eccentric who died 100 years ago,
although no great shakes as a mathematician,
made an important discovery of a phenomenon
that is so trivial that all should be capable of
learning it and so deep that many scientists
spend their whole career being fooled by it.
References
1. Forrest, D.W. (1974) Francis Galton: The
Life and Work of a Victorian Genius. London: Paul Elek.
2. David, H.A. (1995) First (questionable)
occurrence of common terms in mathematical
statistics. American Statistician, 49, 121–133.
3. Galton, F. (1886) Regression towards
mediocrity in hereditary stature. Journal of the
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland,
15, 246–263.
4. Hrobjartsson, A. and Gotzsche, P.C. (2001)
Is the placebo powerless? An analysis of clinical trials
comparing placebo with no treatment. New England
Journal of Medicine, 344, 1594–1602.
5. Kienle, G.S. and Kiene, H. (1997) The
powerful placebo effect: fact or fiction? Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 50, 1311–1318.
6. Senn, S.J. (2003) Dicing with Death.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stephen Senn is a professor of statistics at Glasgow
University. His book Dicing with Death is published by
Cambridge University Press and covers (among other
matters) Francis Galton and the history of regression
to the mean.

