CHAPTER 11

Field Experiments in Marketing
D. Simester
MIT Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, MA, United States
E-mail: simester@mit.edu

Contents
1. Papers that Report Field Experiments
1.1 Date of publication
1.2 Choice of topics
2. Pricing Topics
2.1 Who to target with discounts?
2.2 Which discounts are most effective?
2.3 Price as a signal
2.4 Multipart tariffs and other pricing schemes
3. Advertising Topics
3.1 Is there an impact on purchasing?
3.2 Which messages are most effective?
3.3 Optimizing paid search advertising
4. Product-Related Topics
4.1 Market research and product development
4.2 Product sizes and bundling
5. Model Validation
6. Other Topics
6.1 Sales force optimization
6.2 Word-of-mouth and referrals
6.3 Participation in an online community
6.4 Encouraging positive behaviors
6.5 Other topics
7. Designing Experiments and Future Topics
7.1 Designing experiments for the marketing literature
7.2 Randomization
7.3 Future topics
8. Conclusions
Appendix: Summary of the Papers
Pricing issues
Advertising issues
Market research and product development issues
Validating optimization models
Other topics
References

Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Volume 1
ISSN 2214-658X, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.hefe.2016.07.001

466
467
470
471
472
472
474
475
476
476
477
478
479
479
480
480
481
482
482
482
483
483
484
484
486
487
488
490
490
491
492
493
493
494

© 2017 Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

465

466

Handbook of Field Experiments

Abstract
In the last 20 years the marketing literature has seen a sharp increase in the number of papers reporting ﬁndings from ﬁeld experiments. This can be partly explained by the ease of conducting ﬁeld experiments in Internet settings. However, we have also seen an increase in ﬁeld experiments in physical
stores and other non-Internet settings. While many of these papers focus on pricing and advertising
topics, there are also a broad range of other topics represented, including several papers that use ﬁeld
experiments to provide model-free validation of optimization models. We review the requirements to
publish a ﬁeld experiment paper in the marketing literature. We also identify topics that remain relatively understudied. In particular, there is a notable absence of papers studying channel relationships or
business-to-business markets. Perhaps more surprisingly, there is also a lack of papers investigating the
feasibility of using ﬁeld experiments to optimize marketing decisions.

Keywords
Advertising; Field experiments; Marketing; Model validation; Pricing; Randomization; Sales force; Word
of mouth

JEL Codes
D12; D4; M3

Marketing is a diverse ﬁeld that draws from a rich array of disciplines and a broad assortment of empirical and theoretical methods. One of those disciplines is economics and one
of the methods used to investigate economic questions is ﬁeld experiments. The history of
ﬁeld experiments in the marketing literature is surprisingly long. Early examples include
Curhan (1974) and Eskin and Baron (1977), who vary prices, newspaper advertising,
and display variables in grocery stores. This chapter reviews the recent history of ﬁeld experiments in marketing by identifying papers published in the last 20 years (between 1995
and 2014). We report how the number of papers published has increased during this
period and evaluate different explanations for this increase. We then group the papers
into ﬁve topics and review the papers by topic. This chapter concludes by reﬂecting on
the design of ﬁeld experiments used in marketing and proposing topics for future research.

1. PAPERS THAT REPORT FIELD EXPERIMENTS
We focus on the ﬁve leading marketing journals that publish papers with an economics
focus. They include the Journal of Marketing (JM), the Journal of Marketing Research (JMR),
Marketing Science (MktSci), Quantitative Marketing and Economics (QME), and the marketing department of Management Science (MngSci).1 To identify relevant papers, we ﬁrst had
a research assistant read every issue of the journals published between 1995 and 2014. We
then supplemented this initial list with a Web of Science topic search.
1

The two major marketing journals not included in this list are Journal of Consumer Research (JCR) and the Journal of
Consumer Psychology (JCP). Papers published in these two journals have a strongly psychological perspective.

Field Experiments in Marketing

This process yielded over 300 papers. We then read and screened these papers to
generate a ﬁnal sample of 61 papers.2 In this screening, we restricted attention to studies
in which the response measure represented a behavioral response in the “ﬁeld.” We
excluded studies in which the response was a survey or perceptual measure, such as
customer evaluations or purchase intentions. We also excluded studies where the
responses were obtained in a laboratory setting, including studies where the response
environment was created by the researchers.
The screening also restricted attention to studies that reported experiments, rather
than just analysis of historical data. An experiment includes at least two experimental
conditions, with exogenous variation introduced by the researchers. In most cases, this
exogenous variation results from variation across randomly selected customer samples.
In other cases, it involves rotation of treatments over time or matched pairs of products
in an auction setting.
The 61 papers actually report ﬁndings from a total of 86 ﬁeld experiments, with 18
(30%) of the papers reporting multiple ﬁeld experiments. This includes 12 papers that
report 2 experiments, 5 papers that report 3 experiments, and 1 paper that reports ﬁndings
from 4 experiments.

1.1 Date of publication
Our ﬁrst investigation was to compare the dates the papers were published. The
publication dates are summarized in Fig. 1. Papers reporting ﬁeld experiments were
rare between 1995 and 1999, with just three examples identiﬁed. The frequency has since
increased sharply; between 2010 and 2014 a total of 37 ﬁeld experiment papers were
identiﬁed.
There are likely to be multiple reasons for this trend. One explanation is that the ﬁeld
has become a lot more concerned about endogeneity when interpreting results estimated
using historical data. Before 2000, the marketing literature contained numerous econometric papers studying historical supermarket scanner data.3 Many of these early papers
paid little attention to the endogeneity of the independent variables. This has since
changed. The quantitative marketing ﬁeld now pays a considerable attention to the limitations inherent in interpreting endogenous variables. The focus on endogeneity can
partly be attributed to a 1999 paper that highlighted these limitations (Villas-Boas and
Winer, 1999). The change also coincides with the development of structural models
in the new empirical IO literature. Publication in a leading quantitative marketing journal now requires that the authors justify the source of their identiﬁcation. Many papers
2

3

Although we believe that the list of 61 papers is extensive, it is unlikely to be complete. We recognize that we will
have overlooked some papers that report ﬁeld experiments and apologize to these authors.
This literature traces its origins to Guadagni and Little (1983), which demonstrated how to apply multinomial logit to
scanner data.

467

468

Handbook of Field Experiments

40

37

Number of Papers

35
30
25
20
13

15
8

10
5

3

0
1995 to 1999

2000 to 2004

2005 to 2009

2010 to 2014

Figure 1 Publications by year. This ﬁgure reports the number of papers published by 5-year period.
The sample size is 61 (papers).

using econometrics methods now use structural models to address this concern. Field
experiments provide researchers with an alternative mechanism to overcome this hurdle.
The increased prominence of concern about endogeneity may have contributed to the
sharp increase in the number of published ﬁeld experiments.
A second explanation for the growth in the number of published ﬁeld experiments is
that it has become easier to conduct ﬁeld experiments. The development of the Internet
coincides with the growth in the number of reported experiments. It is now possible to
conduct ﬁeld experiments using eBay and Google AdWords, without requiring active
participation from a cooperating company. Even for studies that do require cooperation,
this cooperation is often much easier to obtain in an Internet setting because the cost of
conducting the experiments is relatively low, and because many ﬁrms already conduct
their own experiments. Firms that conduct experiments as part of their own operations
have implicitly revealed that they understand the value of ﬁeld experiments and are likely
to have invested in infrastructure to support their implementation.4
We can evaluate this explanation by investigating whether the format used to implement experimental variation has changed over time. In particular, we grouped the studies
into three categories according to the type of experimental manipulation:
Physical
Direct mail
Internet

4

in-person interactions in a home, at a workplace, or in a bricks and mortar
retail store (including shelf-signage or product assortments)
telephone, catalog, or other direct mail
search or display advertising, eBay, email, Twitter, Website content, or
another computer or Internet interaction.

We might expect that if it is easier to conduct ﬁeld experiments in Internet settings then papers that use this setting are
more likely to report ﬁndings from multiple experiments. It turns out that the reverse is true; papers reporting ﬁndings
from Internet-based ﬁeld experiments are actually less likely to report multiple studies.

Field Experiments in Marketing

20

15

10

5

0
1995 to 1999

2000 to 2004
Physical

2005 to 2009

Direct Mail

2010 to 2014

Internet

Figure 2 Publications by type of experimental manipulation. This ﬁgure reports the number of papers
published using each type of experimental manipulation in each 5-year period. The sample size is 60.

In Fig. 2, we report how use of these manipulations has changed over time. The total
sample size is 60 observations.5
In the 5 years between 2010 and 2014, there were 19 papers published that used the
Internet to implement experimental variation, representing more than half of the ﬁeld
experiment paper published during this period. Nineteen papers in this 5-year period
contrasts with just three papers in the previous 15 years. We conclude that it is likely
the Internet contributed to the growth in ﬁeld experiment papers across the data period.
However, it is notable that we also see growth in the number of papers implementing
experiments through physical manipulations in home, at the workplace, or in physical
retail stores. There were 12 papers reporting physical manipulations between 2010 and
2014, compared to a total of just nine papers in the previous 15 years. It seems that
the ease of conducting experiments on the Internet is not a complete explanation for
the growth in the number of published papers.
A third explanation is that the top marketing journals are publishing more papers (not
just more ﬁeld experiment papers). In 2006, MktSci increased from four issues a year to six
issues a year, and in 2008, JM and JMR made the same transition. In addition, QME
began publication in 2003. The result is an increase in the total number of published papers. To investigate the extent to which this explains the increase in the frequency of ﬁeld
experiment papers, we counted the total number of papers published across the 20-year
period (1995e2014) and report a histogram of the proportion published in each 5-year

5

In four papers the description of the treatment was insufﬁcient to allow classiﬁcation. Moreover, three papers either
reported multiple studies using different types of variation or used different types of variation across different treatments within the same study. These three papers were coded as appearing in multiple categories.

469

470

Handbook of Field Experiments

% of all papers across all 20 years

80%

61%

60%

40%
31%
20%

19%

18%

31%

21%

13%
0%

5%
All Papers

Field Experiment Papers

Figure 3 Histogram of the number of papers published in each 5-year period. All papers compared to
ﬁeld experiment papers. This ﬁgure reports a histogram of how many papers were published in each
5-year period. We separately report the ﬁndings for all papers, and for just those papers that report
ﬁndings from a ﬁeld experiment. The sample size is 3250 for all papers and 61 for the ﬁeld experiment
papers. The percentages within each curve add to 100%.

period. We do this separately for all papers, and for just those papers that report ﬁeld experiments.6 The ﬁndings are reported in Fig. 3.
While there has been growth in the total number of papers published, this growth is a
lot smaller than the growth in the number of ﬁeld experiment papers. When counting all
of the papers published between 1995 and 2014, we ﬁnd that 31% were published in the
last 5 years (2010e2014). In contrast, 64% of all ﬁeld experiment papers were published
in that period.
We conclude that the sharp growth in the number of marketing papers reporting ﬁeld
experiments can be attributed to several factors. The ﬁeld itself has grown and so there has
been growth in the number of papers published, including ﬁeld experiment and nonﬁeld
experiment papers. Second, the ease of conducting ﬁeld experiments over the Internet
may also have contributed to the phenomenon. Finally, the marketing ﬁeld now pays
more attention to the endogeneity of independent variables. Field experiments are an
effective mechanism for resolving confounds due to endogeneity.

1.2 Choice of topics
In the Fig. 4, we categorize the 61 papers into general topic areas. This categorization
reveals that the papers are dominated by two topics: pricing and advertising.
6

The total number of papers in MktSci, JM, and JMR is calculated using entries in the Web of Science. We excluded
papers published in MngSci as the Web of Science does not identify which department editor accepted the paper.
Unfortunately the Web of Science does not index the ﬁrst few issues of QME, and so for this journal we manually
counted the number of papers published in each issue.

Field Experiments in Marketing

30
23

20
15
11

8

10

4

0
Pricing

Adversing

Model
Product
Validaon Development

Other

Figure 4 Choice of topics. This ﬁgure reports the number of published papers by topic. The sample
size is 61 papers.

Further investigation also reveals clear differences in the distribution of topics over
time. Prior to 2010, half of the papers (12 of 24) addressed pricing topics, with only
two papers investigating advertising issues. However, this dominance has reversed,
with more papers in the last 5 years studying advertising issues (13) than pricing
issues (11).
Understandably, the recent focus on advertising has been dominated by research
questions related to Internet advertising. Many of these papers study characteristics of
Internet advertising that simply did not exist at the start of the data sample. For example,
dynamic retargeting of advertising (targeting advertisements using individual browsing
behaviors on other websites) was not possible earlier in the data period. Similarly, personalizing advertising using information posted on Facebook pages is a relatively recent
advertising technique.
In the sections that follow we brieﬂy survey the papers on each of these topics. We
also summarize all of the papers, grouped by topic, in a table as an Appendix to this
chapter.

2. PRICING TOPICS
The 23 papers investigating pricing issues can be grouped into four subtopics:
1. Who to target with discounts?
2. What types of discounts are most effective?
3. Price as a signal
4. Multipart tariffs and other pricing schemes
The effectiveness of discounts has been a favorite research topic in the marketing ﬁeld.
This in part reﬂects both the pervasiveness of discounts, and recognition that they can
have tremendous positive and negative impacts on unit sales and ﬁrm proﬁts. For

471

472

Handbook of Field Experiments

example, Ailawadi et al. (2007) study the unit sales and proﬁt impact of every discount
offered by the national pharmacy chain CVS in 2003. They report that more than
50% of the promotions are unproﬁtable because the loss of margin is not fully offset
by the incremental sales. Using a very large-scale 13-week ﬁeld test, in which they simply
withheld promotions in 15 product categories in 400 stores, they demonstrated that CVS
could improve its proﬁts by over $50 million.

2.1 Who to target with discounts?
Three ﬁeld experiments contribute to our understanding of who should receive discounts. Dholakia (2006) shows that sending a $5-off discount coupon to customers
who previously paid full price can actually lead to less demand. This study was conducted
using randomly selected customers of a large automobile servicing ﬁrm.7 Anderson and
Simester (2001a) report that offering extended payment terms to customers of a prestigious jewelry catalog can lower demand. The authors interpret this effect as an adverse
quality signal, with the installment billing signaling that the products are suitable for
customers who are more sensitive to price than quality. In a later study with a different
catalog retailer, the same research team reports that deep discounts have more positive
long-term externalities when targeted at new customers compared to existing customers
(Anderson and Simester, 2004). For the existing customers the long-term effects were
negative; the deep discounts resulted in these customers accelerating their purchases
and becoming more price sensitive. In contrast, deeper discounts increased future purchases by new customers, apparently due to more favorable expectations about future
prices. Collectively, these studies suggest that discounts are most effective when targeted
at customers who are newer, who have paid lower prices in the past, and who are relatively more concerned about price than quality.

2.2 Which discounts are most effective?
Field experiments have been used to address not just who should receive discounts but
also what form the discounts should take. The literature now provides a rich answer
to this question. In the oldest paper in our sample, Dhar and Hoch (1996) report the
ﬁndings from two ﬁeld experiments conducted at 86 supermarket stores in the Dominick’s Finer Foods supermarket chain.8 They showed that coupons lead to a 35% larger
increase in unit sales than an equivalent discount in the shelf-price. Moreover, because
redemption of coupons is incomplete, this leads to a 108% larger increase in proﬁts. In
7

8

Related ﬁndings from two ﬁeld experiments are reported by Anderson and Simester (2010), which is published in an
economics journal. Customers of a publishing catalog and an apparel catalog were less likely to place a subsequent
order if they received a catalog containing lower prices than they had recently paid for the same item.
This is the same retailer that provided the data for the now widely used Dominick’s scan data panel.

Field Experiments in Marketing

two large-scale ﬁeld experiments conducted at the (apparently) same 86 supermarkets,
Wansink et al. (1998) illustrate two ways that retailers can increase the number of units
that customers purchase. Imposing a quantity limit of 12 units per customers led to customers purchasing twice as many units (per buyer) compared to a quantity limit of 4 units.
Framing discounts using multiple unit promotions (e.g., 2 for $1.50) instead of single unit
promotions (75-cents each) also increased the number of units that customers purchased.
Both of these effects are interpreted as examples of customers anchoring on retailerprovided cues to decide how many units to purchase. In another example of framing,
Chen et al. (2012) show that describing a discount as “50% more free” is more effective
than “33% off the regular price,” even though both are economically equivalent. Their
study is motivated by related evidence that customers tend to focus on the % magnitude
of the discount and neglect the base over which the percentage is calculated.
Ramanathan and Dhar (2010) present ﬁndings suggesting that the impact of different
types of promotions may vary according to the customer’s psychological orientation.
Customers entering a Chicago grocery store were primed to think of either enjoying
themselves or acting sensibly. Those primed to enjoy themselves purchased more items
when they received coupons with longer expiration dates, and when the coupons were
framed as “Get $x Off” rather than “Save $x.” In contrast, customers primed to act
sensibly purchased more items when they received coupons with shorter expiration dates
and when the coupons read “Save $x.”
There have been several studies investigating the impact of framing discounts as “free
samples” or “free gifts.” Bawa and Shoemaker (2004) use two ﬁeld experiments to disentangle three effects of offering free samples: demand acceleration (temporal substitution),
cannibalization, and demand expansion. They show that unlike coupons, free samples
can generate positive long-term effects that can endure for as much as 12 months after
the event. In a longitudinal study in the ﬁnancial services sector, Haisley and Loewenstein
(2011) investigated how offering customers unexpected gifts affected their subsequent
deposit balances. They found that an increasing sequence of gifts ($35 then $100) had
a more positive impact on subsequent balances than a decreasing sequence ($100 then
$35). They described this as an “aversion to deterioration.” Shu and Gneezy (2010) study
how expiration dates on gift certiﬁcates affect redemption rates. Participants who
received gift certiﬁcates with a longer expiration data had more favorable perceptions
of the ﬁrm but were actually less likely to redeem the certiﬁcates. They attribute this
proﬁtable coincidence to procrastination and support this claim using a follow-up survey.
Laran and Tsiros (2013) investigate how uncertainty about which free gift will be offered
inﬂuences the effectiveness of these promotions. If customers were primed to think about
their decisions, they responded more favorably if they knew what free gift they would
receive. In contrast, if they were primed to make more emotional decisions then the uncertain gift was more effective.

473

474

Handbook of Field Experiments

We also highlight three particularly innovative studies. Hui et al. (2013) investigate
the impact of sending discounts through mobile phone technology. They show that
sending coupons for products that are located further away from the customers’ planned
in-store shopping paths are effective at increasing unplanned purchases. Tsiros and
Hardesty (2010) study how to most effectively remove discounts. They show that phasing
out a discount gradually is more effective at raising unit sales than removing the discount
all at once. They attribute this in part to higher customer expectations about future price
levels. Gaurav et al. (2011) study the adoption of rainfall insurance in rural Indian villages.
The insurance is a relatively sophisticated ﬁnancial product, and they ﬁnd that training
customers about the products is generally more effective than offering other forms of
marketing promotions. The exception is a “MoneyBack” guarantee if the farmers never
have cause to claim on the insurance, which works almost as effectively as the training
programs.

2.3 Price as a signal
A third group of pricing studies focuses on the signaling role of prices. Using data from an
apparel catalog, Anderson and Simester (2001b) highlight the importance of rationing
how often sale signs are used. They motivate this study as a test of an earlier paper that
argues that sale signs serve a credible signaling role, enabling poorly informed customers
to evaluate which prices are low relatively to other prices in the market (Anderson and
Simester, 1998). A key feature of that model is that the sale signs are self-regulating; any
one sign becomes less credible the more often it is used. In a related study, Anderson and
Simester (2003) measure the impact of 9-digit price endings (e.g., $1.99 or $49). Using a
series of three ﬁeld experiments conducted at two different women’s apparel catalogs,
they show that $9 price endings increase demand, and that this demand increase is
stronger on newer items than for established items. However, the effect appears to be
weakened when the $9 price ending is accompanied by a “sale” sign. They interpret these
ﬁndings as evidence that the price endings serve a similar signaling role to “sale” signs,
revealing to customers which items are discounted compared to other prices in the
market.
Gneezy et al. (2014) investigate the information that prices signal about quality.
When customers see high prices they anticipate higher quality and so react more
adversely if quality is low. As a result, customers evaluate a low-quality product with a
high price more negatively than a low-quality product with a low price. They establish
this result using a ﬁeld experiment at a small California vineyard.
Two other papers in this signaling stream have already been discussed as contributions
to the discounting literature. Recall that Anderson and Simester’s (2001a) evidence that
extended payment terms lowered sales at a prestigious jewelry catalog was interpreted as
evidence that targeting price-sensitive customers can undermine the credibility of a

Field Experiments in Marketing

retailer’s quality claim. Similarly, the evidence that deeper discounts to ﬁrst-time
customers can make these customers more loyal also had a signaling interpretation
(Anderson and Simester, 2004), although in this case the signal was about future prices
rather than quality.

2.4 Multipart tariffs and other pricing schemes
The fourth stream of pricing-related ﬁeld experiments addresses multiperiod and multipart tariffs together with other innovative pricing schemes. Lambrecht and Tucker (2012)
report one of the few ﬁeld experiments conducted in a business-to-business setting. They
collaborate with a web hosting provider in the United Kingdom to investigate the impact
of varying both the monthly price and the framing of “hassle costs” in the ﬁrst period of a
multiperiod contract. Rather than evaluating the entire contract term, they show that
customers in this market evaluate the outcome in each distinct period. As a result,
they show that if customers incur hassle costs in the ﬁrst period, then it is more effective
to lower the ﬁrst period price and defer some of this revenue until later periods.
Anderson and Simester (2008) show that price differentiation can lower demand if it is
perceived to be unfair. Their ﬁeld experiment was conducted in a women’s apparel catalog that sells plus sizes. Because the cost of producing very large garments is higher than
the cost of producing smaller garments, the retailer sought to charge higher prices on its
largest sizes. The results revealed an asymmetry; there was no change in demand at the
smaller sizes, but demand fell sharply for the larger sizes (even after controlling for the
absolute price itself). They interpret these ﬁndings as evidence that price differentiation
can lower demand if it is perceived to be unfair. However, customers actually have to
experience the unfairness; it is not sufﬁcient to see other customers treated unfairly.
Two papers focus on multipart tariff schemes. Danaher (2002) uses the exogenous
variation introduced through a ﬁeld experiment in the telecommunications market to
develop an optimal pricing model for a two-part tariff. The scheme includes both a
monthly access fee, together with a per-minute usage rate for cellular phone service.
The results highlight the importance of accounting for both usage and customer retention. Solely focusing on usage and ignoring attrition will substantially underestimate the
sensitivity of revenue to price. Yao et al. (2012) also study cellular phone pricing,
although in their case they use a ﬁeld experiment to recover estimates of customer discount rates (rather than revenue price sensitivity). Customers’ plan choices reveal much
faster consumer discounting of future periods than we normally assume.
Perhaps the most unusual pricing scheme represented in the literature is a “pay-whatyou-want” (PWYW) scheme. Kim, Natter, and Spann report three ﬁeld experiments
conducted in German restaurants and a movie theatre. The ﬁrms rotated PWYW
schemes and their standard pricing schemes on different days. In general, customers chose
to pay lower prices than the prices which ﬁrms regularly charged. However, this was not

475

476

Handbook of Field Experiments

always the case. Customers in one of the experiments chose to pay an average of $1.94 for
a hot beverage, compared to the regular price of $1.75. In another experiment, customers
on average chose to pay less for a buffet lunch ($6.44) than the regular price ($7.99), but
the PWYW scheme attracted enough extra demand to generate signiﬁcantly higher daily
revenue.

3. ADVERTISING TOPICS
The 15 papers that focus on advertising-related issues can be grouped into three broad
subtopics:
1. Does advertising impact purchasing?
2. Which advertising messages are most effective?
3. Optimizing paid search advertising

3.1 Is there an impact on purchasing?
Four papers investigate whether advertising can impact purchasing, including two papers
that reach a relatively negative conclusion. Lewis and Reiley (2014) study whether
display advertisements at Yahoo! caused ofﬂine purchases at a department store. Despite
a controlled randomized environment and a sample size of 1.6 million customers, they
are only just able to establish a statistically signiﬁcant effect. Lambrecht and Tucker
(2013) study the effects of “dynamic retargeting” of advertisements. Dynamic retargeting
describes the widely used practice of using browsing history from other websites to select
which advertising content to display. They ﬁnd that this practice does not increase advertising effectiveness. The exception is when the browsing history indicates that a customer
is relatively close to making a purchase. It is only then that dynamic retargeting is
effective.
Another paper with a key ﬁnding that is effectively a null result focuses on the impact
of digital video recorders (DVRs) on advertising effectiveness. The introduction of
DVRs led to concern that television advertising would become less effective because customers could ﬁlter out advertising. In this very large-scale study, the authors found no
evidence that this was the case. Instead the authors concluded that ﬁltering out advertisements occurs relatively infrequently. In contrast to the two previous papers, this could be
considered a relatively positive paper about the impact of advertising. It suggests that the
widespread consumer adoption of DVR technology will not diminish the impact of TV
advertising.
The fourth paper in this sequence investigates the impact of competitive advertising.
Competing catalog retailers share the names and addresses of their best customers on a
reciprocal basis to lower the costs of prospecting for new customers. Using a randomized
ﬁeld experiment, Anderson and Simester (2013) measure how allowing competitors to
target your customers with competing catalogs impacts a ﬁrm’s own sales to those

Field Experiments in Marketing

customers. Although we might expect a negative effect due to substitution, they actually
ﬁnd that for many customers the competitors’ advertising increased purchases from the
original ﬁrm. This positive effect was particularly strong in product categories in which
customers learn product sizes that are ﬁrm-speciﬁc (such as footwear). This leads the authors to attribute their ﬁndings to the importance of product standards, customer
learning, and switching costs.

3.2 Which messages are most effective?
An additional nine papers focus on improving messaging to increase advertising response
rates. They include several papers that address targeting or personalization of advertising
messages. For example, Tucker (2014) reports a ﬁeld experiment conducted on
Facebook that studies how customers react to advertisements that are personalized based
on a customer’s posted personal information (see also Lambrecht and Tucker, 2013; which
is discussed earlier). Fortuitously, the experiment coincided with a widely publicized
change in Facebook’s privacy policies, which gave users more control over their personalization settings. The ﬁndings reveal that giving customers the option of controlling their
personalization settings greatly improved the performance of targeted advertisements.
Schumann et al. (2014) study how to mitigate adverse customer reactions to targeted
Internet advertising. They show that reciprocity appeals (“Our service is free of charge
to you e targeted advertising helps us fund it”) are more effective than relevance claims
(“You will see more interesting and less irrelevant advertisements in the future”).
Three studies investigate how messaging should be customized to different customer
segments using dimensions other than prior browsing behavior. Berger and Schwarz
(2011) study messages that prompt customers to recommend products to other customers
(word-of-mouth, WOM). They show that messages that link a brand to a product cue are
more effective when customers do not already have strong associations between the brand
and the cue. Using a Google AdWords ﬁeld experiment conducted in Israel, Kronrod et al.
(2012) demonstrate that the use of assertive messages (“You must save the Mediterranean”)
are more effective when customers already believe in the cause, but are less effective for
more general causes, for which customers’ preferences are weaker.
Beyond Kronrod et al. (2012), two other studies investigate how to design messaging
that encourages customers to engage in more environmentally friendly behavior. In an
ambitious study, White and Simpson (2013) collaborate with a large metropolitan city
to encourage residents to leave their grass clippings on the ground, rather than disposing
them through the municipal waste system (which sends the clippings to landﬁlls). Using
hangers placed on the front doors of resident’s home, they tested six different messaging
conditions, together with a control condition. They then measured the reduction in
waste. Varying the type of appeal after priming a focus on either individual or social beneﬁts had a signiﬁcant effect on residents’ behavior. Spangenberg et al. (2003) report two

477

478

Handbook of Field Experiments

studies. In the ﬁrst study, they investigate how messages in outdoor advertising media
(billboards) can increase recycling. In the second study, they vary the content of messages
inserted in a health club’s monthly newsletters and billing statement, with the goal of
increasing member visits to the club. They show that framing an appeal as a selfprediction increases its effectiveness. Speciﬁcally, in the ﬁtness club study, the message
“Fitness guilt?” was more effective at increasing member visits than the alternative treatment “Work out at [ﬁtness club name].”
Two other examples of messaging tests were reported by Tucker and Zhang (2010,
2011). Both of these studies investigate how reporting participation in a two-sided
network increases participation in the network. The ﬁrst example is Tucker and Zhang
(2010), which is another rare example of a study in a business-to-business market. The
setting was a Website that resembles craigslist.org, and the outcome measure was the
number of sellers who chose to list on the site. The ﬁeld experiment randomized whether
to display the number of buyers and/or sellers and (if so) the number of buyers and/or
sellers to claim. They ﬁnd that a large number of sellers can deter additional listings, unless
only the number of sellers is revealed (not the number of buyers). Displaying many
buyers will attract more sellers as long as the number of sellers is also revealed. They
conclude that markets with more competitors can appear more attractive to entrants,
as there must be sufﬁcient demand to attract so many competitors (a positive network
externality). The second study, Tucker and Zhang (2011), uses data from a Website
that lists wedding service vendors. They randomize whether the Website reveals the previous number of clicks on a vendor. We might expect that revealing this information
would increase the popularity of the vendors with the most clicks. Instead, they show
that the same level of historical clicks results in a larger lift for brands with a niche market
position, compared to a brand with a mainstream position. Customers appear to infer that
these brands must provide high quality to overcome their narrow reach.
The ﬁnal paper investigating the impact of advertising messages includes a pair of
studies conducted using matched pairs of music CD auctions on eBay. Dholakia and
Simonson (2005) study the impact of messaging that explicitly recommends that potential
bidders “compare the price of this CD with the prices of similar CDs listed next to this
one.” They ﬁnd that these messages lead to more cautious bidding behavior. The winning bidders tended to submit later bids, submit fewer bids, and avoid participating in
simultaneous auctions. They interpret the ﬁndings as evidence that making competing
options more salient makes customers more risk averse because opportunity costs become
more prominent.

3.3 Optimizing paid search advertising
Two papers by different teams investigate how to optimize paid search advertising. Yang
and Ghose (2010) begin by using an historical panel data set to investigate how the

Field Experiments in Marketing

response to paid search advertising is affected by the presence of organic (unpaid) search
results. They then test the robustness of the model predictions using an 8-week ﬁeld
experiment on Google. They conﬁrmed that when paid search is present, so that
customers can see both paid and organic search results, the combined click-through
rate (CTR) was 5.1% higher compared to when there was no paid search present.
The conversion rate (probability of a purchase) also increases by 11.7%.
Agarwal et al. (2011) investigate the importance of position in paid search advertising.
Speciﬁcally, they ask whether being the ﬁrst search result, second result, or a lower result,
impacts both CTRs and conversion (purchases). As we might expect, the closer to the
ﬁrst position, the higher the CTR. However, the opposite is true for conversion rates.
Appearing lower in the rank of search results can actually increase conversion rates
because conversion is conditional on clicking. As a result, only the most motivated customers click on lower results, and these are the customers that are more likely to convert.
Given advertisers generally pay for clicks irrespective of conversions, it may be optimal
for many advertisers to prefer lower positions in the search order.

4. PRODUCT-RELATED TOPICS
We identiﬁed seven papers that present ﬁeld experiments addressing product-related
topics. This includes four studies focused on market research and product development
issues, and three papers focused on product sizes.

4.1 Market research and product development
Two studies investigate the role that mere measurement can have on customer purchasing
behavior. Chandon et al. (2005) asked 251 customers of an online grocer about their
purchase intentions. A second randomly selected set of 140 consumers served as the
control (and were not asked any questions). The study revealed that the customers
who were surveyed were signiﬁcantly more likely to make a subsequent purchase and
were signiﬁcantly more proﬁtable for the retailer. Two years later, a different research
team conducted a related study in the automotive services industry (Borle et al.,
2007). A telephone survey was administered to 3773 randomly selected customers. Subsequent service visits by these customers were then compared with a randomly selected
control sample of 1227 customers. This comparison revealed that participating in the survey increased purchases and made customers more responsive to ﬁrm promotions.
The other two studies on this topic use ﬁeld experiments to validate new market
research methods. Urban et al. (1997) validate a method for conducting research very
early in the product development process. Forecasts of new product sales are more valuable the earlier they are available. The authors investigate the possibility of using multimedia representations of potential new products to provide earlier and less costly
forecasts. They conduct two ﬁeld experiments, which conﬁrm that multimedia computer

479

480

Handbook of Field Experiments

interactions can both realistically portray customers’ information sources and yield
forecasts that are not signiﬁcantly different from traditional methods. Neslin et al.
(2009) propose a model that is designed to maximize response rates to online market
research panels. The model is dynamic, optimizing over a discrete number of studies
in a ﬁnite period, where this ﬁnite period can be extended using a rolling horizon.
They compare their model against the current managerial heuristic and report
signiﬁcantly higher response rates.

4.2 Product sizes and bundling
Consumers’ assessments of relative package volumes are often biased when packages have
different shapes. Krider et al. (2001) investigate this bias by comparing how customers
react to product packages that have the same volume but different shapes. In a university
cafeteria that sells cream cheese to complement bagels, the authors compare demand for a
3
/4 oz round tub of cream cheese and a 3/4 oz square tub of the same cream cheese. Customers were signiﬁcantly more likely to purchase two tubs of cream cheese for their bagel
on days that only the round tubs of cream cheese were available. This ﬁnding is consistent
with other evidence in their paper that customers perceive round containers to be smaller
than rectangular containers of the same volume.
Leszczyc and Haubl (2010) report ﬁndings from three ﬁeld tests that investigate the
proﬁtability of product bundling. Using a series of eBay auctions of collectable postage
stamps, they compare the proﬁtability of bundling-related and -unrelated items. Their
ﬁndings reveal that bundling substitutes or unrelated items in an auction are less proﬁtable
than selling them separately, but bundling is more proﬁtable when the items are complementary. A third study related to product bundling has already been discussed as an
example of a pricing-related paper. Recall that in an experiment conducted at 86 supermarket stores, Wansink et al. (1998) compared the effectiveness of multiple unit promotions (e.g., 2 for $1.50) versus single unit promotions (75 cents each). The multiple unit
promotions increased the number of units that customers purchased by an average of 32%.

5. MODEL VALIDATION
The marketing ﬁeld has a long tradition of developing models that optimize marketing
decisions. Traditionally, these models are validated by measuring goodness-of-ﬁt, either
in-sample or with holdout samples. A limitation of this validation is that it generally relies
on assumptions inherent in the models, and so errors in the assumptions are also introduced to the validation process.
Because of these limitations, researchers have begun using ﬁeld experiments as a
means of validating marketing models. Field experiments provide an almost ideal validation setting; different polices can be implemented in treatment and control settings and

Field Experiments in Marketing

their outcomes compared. This provides a “model-free” basis for validation, together
with a comprehensive test of all of the assumptions in the model.
For example, Simester et al. (2006) propose a model for dynamically optimizing
catalog (and other direct marketing) mailing decisions. Catalog ﬁrms regularly send catalogs to customers and must decide who should receive each catalog. Traditionally, these
decisions have been made myopically; the companies send catalogs to customers who are
most likely to respond to that catalog. The model proposed in this paper optimizes a
sequence of mailing decisions over an inﬁnite horizon. The model begins by proposing
a method for dividing customers into discrete Markov states using a set of variables
describing each customer’s purchasing and mailing histories. Transition probabilities
and rewards are then estimated for each strategy (mail or not mail) in each state space.
Finally, a standard policy-iteration algorithm is used to calculate the optimal policy in
each state. The authors then test their proposed method by varying catalog mailing
decisions for 60,000 customers of an apparel catalog over a period of 6 months including
12 catalog mailing dates. The ﬁndings revealed that the model performed well for lowvalued and moderately valued customers. However, during the initial months of the
experiment, the results were less favorable for the most valuable customers in the sample.
Further investigation revealed an explanation for the poor initial outcome for these
customers: in the training data, there were too few occasions in which the ﬁrm had
not mailed to these customers to provide a reliable estimate of the outcome.
These comparisons not only validate the proposed models but have also proved
valuable as a source of insights about the underlying phenomenon.9
In addition to Simester et al. (2006), we identiﬁed seven other papers published in the
last 20 years that employ ﬁeld experiments to validate optimization models. These
include two pricing models, three advertising models, and two new market research
methods. All but one of these papers was published in 2006 or later, suggesting growing
interest in this approach. Although some of the papers involve relatively small numbers of
participants (see, for example, Urban et al., 1997; and Belloni et al., 2012), others include
large numbers of participants and extended treatment periods. For example, Mantrala
et al. (2006) compare the outcome when implementing an optimal pricing model in
200 experimental stores over a period of 8 weeks.

6. OTHER TOPICS
Our search revealed an additional 10 studies that do not ﬁt easily within the previous
four topics. Notably, these papers are all relatively recent, with the ﬁrst published in
9

The ﬁndings in the Simester et al. (2006) ﬁeld experiment led to a subsequent paper (Shie et al., 2007) in which the
authors documented the potential for positive bias when applying dynamic programming models to ﬁeld data.

481

482

Handbook of Field Experiments

2008, and eight of them published in the last 5 years. We have grouped these papers
into ﬁve topics:
1. Sales force optimization
2. WOM and referrals
3. Participation in online communities
4. Encouraging positive behaviors
5. Other topics.

6.1 Sales force optimization
Kumar et al. (2008) report ﬁndings from two large-scale ﬁeld experiments. One experiment was conducted with a multinational business-to-business technology ﬁrm, while
the second study was conducted with a ﬁrm in the telecommunications industry that sells
to both businesses and retail consumers. The studies compared a “customer focus” in
which the timing of sales calls was coordinated with forecasts of customers’ purchasing
decisions. In this condition, sales calls were also coordinated across product categories,
so that if a customer was expected to purchase multiple categories assigned to different
sales teams, the customer received a joint visit from both teams. This coordinated policy
was compared with a standard policy, which lacked coordination. The two treatments
were randomly assigned within matched pairs of customers. The ﬁndings revealed that
coordination led to signiﬁcantly higher proﬁts and return-on-investment. Lim et al.
(2009) also investigate sales force optimization issues using randomized ﬁeld experiments,
although they focus on sales force incentives. Speciﬁcally, they compare the impact of
different prize structures in sales contests. Their ﬁndings indicate that a sales contest
should include multiple prize winners and rank ordering prizes in contests with multiple
winners does not increase sales or revenues.

6.2 Word-of-mouth and referrals
In a widely cited paper, Godes and Mayzlin (2009) investigate whether ﬁrm actions
designed to encourage WOM lead to higher sales. They ﬁnd that WOM is more effective at increasing sales if it comes from relatively less loyal customers. They also report that
WOM generates more sales if it comes from acquaintances, rather than close friends.
Kumar et al. (2010) use four ﬁeld experiments conducted with a ﬁnancial services ﬁrm
to identify which customers a ﬁrm should target when designing customer referral programs. They use the ﬁndings to validate an approach for computing the “customer
referral value” for each customer.

6.3 Participation in an online community
In a study conducted in Germany involving eBay users, Algesheimer et al. (2010) measure the impact of a program designed to increase participation in the ﬁrm’s online

Field Experiments in Marketing

community. Customers in the randomly assigned treatment group received multiple
email messages inviting participation, while those in the control group did not receive
these messages. Over the next year customers in the treatment group spent less and listed
fewer items than customers in the control group.
Two years later an overlapping research team conducted a follow-up study again using
German eBay users (Zhu et al., 2012). Email messages to a randomly selected treatment
group were again used to invite participation in the ﬁrm’s online community. The ﬁndings
reveal that participants engage in more risk-seeking bidding behavior. This effect is only
true when community members have strong ties to other members of the community.
The ﬁndings are replicated in a second ﬁeld experiment conducted with prosper.com.
Toubia and Stephen (2013) study why people contribute to the microblogging site
Twitter (see also our earlier discussion of Berger and Schwarz, 2011, who ask why customers contribute WOM). They experimentally manipulated the number of Twitter
followers and compared their posting activities to a randomly assigned controlled group.
Their ﬁndings suggest that many users contribute because they care about how people
perceive them, rather than because they derive intrinsic utility from the activity.

6.4 Encouraging positive behaviors
We earlier described two papers that study how advertising messages can lead to prosocial
behavior (White and Simpson, 2013 study waste reduction, and Spangenberg et al., 2003
study recycling behavior). Two other papers have focused on encouraging positive behaviors. Raju et al. (2010) examine how to encourage children to choose healthier
food options. The most effective intervention was to establish a “friendly healthful eating
competition with students at the same grade level from other participating schools.”
Asking the children to sign a pledge to eat more fruits and vegetables and providing direct
incentives for healthy choices (e.g., pencils, stickers, key chains) also led to improved
eating habits, even up to 10 weeks after the interventions ended.
Soman and Cheema (2011) compare methods for improving savings rates among
low-income laborers in rural India. Financial planners visited the 146 families in the study
for 15 weeks, and gave them a savings goal, which was placed in a sealed envelope.
Experimental variations included the size of this goal, whether their pictures of their children were printed on the envelope, and whether the savings goal was pooled into a single
envelope or split between two envelopes. Although the size of the goal did not affect the
savings rate, savings were signiﬁcantly higher in the photograph condition, and when the
savings were partitioned into multiple envelopes.

6.5 Other topics
The remaining two papers study diverse topics. Dagger and Danaher (2014) report ﬁndings from ﬁeld experiments designed to measure how remodeling a store impacts store

483

484

Handbook of Field Experiments

demand. The ﬁrst of these studies was conducted at an “equipment retailer and service
provider” that retained its original retail space, while remodeling new space in the
building to serve as a replacement retail space. The researchers randomly rotated the retail
operations between the new and old spaces for a period of 6 weeks. They found that the
remodeled space increased sales signiﬁcantly more for new customers than for existing
customers. They replicate their ﬁndings in a second study conducted in a large department store.
Haruvy and Leszczyc (2010) conducted a series of experiments using pairs of simultaneous auctions to measure the impact of a range of auction features, including: auction
durations, shipping costs, the level of open reserve prices, and the use of secret reserve
prices. The results reveal considerable price dispersion within the auction pairs. They
also conﬁrm that the auction features had signiﬁcant effects on ﬁnal prices, which the authors attribute to the role of search costs.

7. DESIGNING EXPERIMENTS AND FUTURE TOPICS
We conclude by reﬂecting on what is required to publish ﬁeld experiments in the marketing literature. We also discuss the range of topics that have been studied and identify
topics that remain relatively understudied.

7.1 Designing experiments for the marketing literature
Field experiments published in marketing obviously share many of the same characteristics as ﬁeld experiments published in economics journals. However, there are some distinguishing features. Publishing any empirical study in the marketing literature requires
more than merely documenting an effect. Researchers are expected to also shed light
on the mechanism that causes the effect. For example, it is not sufﬁcient to just show
that multiple unit promotions (e.g., 2 for $1.50) are more effective than single unit promotions (75 cents each). Wansink et al. (1998) were also expected to explain this result as
an example of a more general phenomenon. They interpreted their ﬁnding as an example
of “anchoring and adjustment.”
This requirement can be a formidable obstacle for ﬁeld experiments, as it is often not
possible to interview customers, or to otherwise collect intermediate process measures
that can reveal underlying causes. Instead, there are four approaches that researchers
have generally used to investigate the cause of their effects, and they often use these approaches in combination.
First, many papers report interactions rather than just main effects. For example,
Tucker and Zhang (2011) do not just report the main effect of revealing popularity information on a Website. Instead, they compare these effects for niche versus mainstream
brands. Similarly, Berger and Schwarz (2011) compare the effect of advertising message
on WOM for customers who have strong and weak associations between the brand and

Field Experiments in Marketing

the message. For researchers seeking to publish ﬁeld experiments in marketing, it is
important to give careful thought to what interactions they can measure and how those
interactions will help clarify the cause of their effects. Insightful interactions are often
viewed as the “clever” element of a study. Ideally the interactions are consistent with
a proposed argument and are difﬁcult to reconcile with alternative explanations. Indeed,
this is the beneﬁt of reporting interactions; they are more likely to be immune from alternative explanations.
To estimate interactions, researchers sometimes use multiple ﬁeld experiments (recall
that 30% of the papers report results from multiple ﬁeld experiments). Although the additional studies are occasionally positioned as replications (e.g., Danaher, 2002), they are
also often used to investigate interactions (e.g., Anderson and Simester, 2003). Other
studies report a single experiment but include a large number of experimental treatments.
For example, in Gaurav et al. (2011) study of demand for rainfall insurance among rural
Indian farmers, they include 14 different experimental conditions. In general, studies
either report multiple experiments or multiple treatments (and not both).10
Where a paper reports a single ﬁeld experiment with just two conditions, it is
common to complement the ﬁeld experiment with one or more laboratory experiments.
Examples include Kronrod et al. (2012), who add two laboratory experiments, and
Krider, Raghubir, and Krishna, who report ﬁve laboratory experiments. In papers that
include multiple laboratory experiments, the ﬁeld experiment often serves a less prominent role. In particular, the laboratory experiments may establish the main effect, replicate the effect, and investigate interactions, whereas the ﬁeld experiment is relegated to
conﬁrming generalizability in a ﬁeld setting.
A third approach used to investigate explanations is to combine the ﬁeld experiment
with a customer survey. For example, recall that Anderson and Simester (2001a)
measured how customers react to an installment billing offer in a premium jewelry catalog. Customers did not purchase as much in the installment billing condition, which
they interpreted as an adverse quality signal, revealing that the products are targeted at
customers who are more sensitive to quality than price. To support this interpretation,
they mailed catalogs similar to those used for the experimental treatments to other
randomly selected customer samples, together with a short survey. Customers who
received the installment billing version were more likely to express concern about product quality. One respondent wrote on the survey instrument: “It makes [catalog name]
look tacky to have installment plans e kind of like Franklin Mint dolls” (at page 326).
Shu and Gneezy (2010) provide a similar example of using a survey to validate an explanation for their experimental ﬁndings.

10

The pairwise correlation between the number of experiments and the (maximum) number of conditions is

0.14.

485

486

Handbook of Field Experiments

The fourth approach is to use ﬁeld experiment data to estimate a structural model. For
example, in a recent working paper, Dube et al. (2016) report ﬁndings from two ﬁeld
experiments in which they sent SMS (text) messages to Chinese mobile phone users offering promotions on movie tickets. They randomly varied (1) the size of the discount,
(2) whether the text indicated the service provider would donate to a local charity for
every ticket purchased, and (3) the size of the donation (if any). Surprisingly, they
show that customers are less responsive to larger donations when the discounts are large.
They estimate a structural model to provide evidence that this effect results from “selfsignaling”; larger price discounts prompt consumers to infer that their purchases are no
longer altruistic. The authors observe that without the structural model there is no
obvious way to test this mechanism and disentangle it from alternative explanations.
This approach of using a structural model to explain the ﬁndings in a ﬁeld experiment
is still relatively novel in the marketing literature. The structural modeling and ﬁeld
experiment literature have grown at similar times, perhaps partly because they offer alternative solutions to resolving endogeneity concerns (see earlier discussion). This paper recognizes that the two approaches are not just alternatives; they can also complement each
other. Given the rapid growth in interest in both methods, once the beneﬁts of
combining the methods are more widely recognized we should anticipate many more
papers using this combination of methods.

7.2 Randomization
Randomization offers well-documented statistical advantages when comparing treatment and control conditions. However, randomization is not required to publish ﬁeld
experiments in the marketing literature. In 29% of the papers, experimental treatments
were not assigned by randomization (in three papers it was unclear whether the studies
used randomization). In some cases, randomization could have led to contagion between
the experimental treatments. For example, in Soman and Cheema’s (2011) study of how
to increase savings levels among rural Indian laborers, participants were assigned to conditions “according to geographic and social clusters to minimize the possibility of households from different treatment conditions meeting and discussing their participation” (at
page S17). In other cases, it is not obvious how randomization could be achieved. For
example, in the studies involving matched pairs of auctions on eBay (Dholakia and
Simonson, 2005; Leszczyc and Haubl, 2010,; Haruvy and Leszczyc, 2010), the matched
pairs serve as treatment and control samples. Randomizing the experimental treatments
between products within a pair would not be meaningful, either because the products are
identical or because the experimental variation involves differences in the product bundles themselves.
In the absence of randomization, a common approach is to rotate treatments across
time. For example, in Dagger and Danaher’s (2014) study of a store remodeling, “the

Field Experiments in Marketing

original retail environment served as the control, used in weeks 1, 4 and 5. The new environment, which represented the treatment condition, was in place for weeks 2, 3 and 6”
(page 66).11 Other examples include Yang and Ghose (2010), where the treatment was
implemented by rotating sponsorship of key words in 2 week intervals, and Krider et al.
(2001), who rotate across days the shape of cream cheese packages in a store.

7.3 Future topics
This survey of the recent marketing literature reveals a remarkable diversity in ﬁeld
experiment topics. This mirrors the diversity of topics in the ﬁeld generally. Firms
have a wide range of levers that they can use to inﬂuence demand, and the marketing
literature consequently has a wide range of topics to choose from. Notably, the Internet
has increased the range of levers available to ﬁrms, and this has further broadened the
topics that are studied.
While the diversity of available topics makes the ﬁeld attractive to researchers, it is also
a weakness. Almost without exception, the papers we have discussed raise new research
questions, rather than building on previous research. Other ﬁelds beneﬁt from greater
focus in their research topics, such as the study of price rigidity in the monetary economics literature. This is not the case in marketing, which lacks broad agreement about
the research questions that should be prioritized. As a result, there has not been a tradition
of extending previous ﬁndings and comprehensively answering well-deﬁned problems.
Although there are some exceptions to this observation, many of the exceptions reﬂect
a dedication to a research question by a single research team (or by teams with overlapping researchers).
Despite the diversity of topics, there are topics that are clearly underrepresented.
None of the papers investigate issues related to managing upstream or downstream channel partnerships. For example, none of the papers investigate the beneﬁts of exclusivity in
supply or distribution relationships, or the role of standardization to facilitate coordination. The absence of studies on these topics may in part reﬂect the difﬁculty of implementing experimental variation. Variation in channel relationships almost always
requires conﬂict, which disrupts relationships that ﬁrms have often spent considerable
time building.
There is also relatively little research studying business-to-business markets. Only ﬁve
of the papers report ﬁeld experiments in which ﬁrms target other businesses (this includes
one study targeting rural farmers in India). This paucity of studies may reﬂect difﬁculties
in generating sufﬁcient sample in these markets. Experimentation may also be hindered
by greater transparency, which could lead to business customers in the different
11

Dagger and Danaher (2014) did randomly assign the treatments to the 6 weeks, although it is common for rotation to
occur without randomization.

487

488

Handbook of Field Experiments

experimental conditions becoming aware of the experimental variation (although this
limitation would also seem relevant in several of the Internet studies). A third possibility
is that the time required to implement change and observe outcomes could be longer in
business-to-business settings than in consumer markets.
What is perhaps most surprising is the lack of papers investigating the feasibility of
using ﬁeld experiments to optimize marketing decisions. As we have already recognized,
the marketing ﬁeld has a long history of developing models to optimize marketing decisions. Indeed, eight of the papers that we reviewed report on ﬁeld experiments
designed to validate example of optimization models. However, ﬁeld experiments are
themselves an optimization method. By experimentally changing marketing variables
and comparing the outcomes, ﬁrms could in principle use ﬁeld experiments to improve
proﬁts by searching across the space of possible decisions.
None of the empirical papers we surveyed investigate the feasibility of this approach.
Perhaps the closest example is Danaher (2002), which uses the data from a ﬁeld experiment implemented by a telecommunications company to develop a statistical model
that optimizes a two-part tariff (pricing) scheme. However, in this example the ﬁeld
experiment is used as a source of data, while the optimization is pursued using more traditional methods.
Although we could ﬁnd no empirical papers that study whether ﬁrms could use ﬁeld
experiments as a practical optimization method, there is a recent theoretical paper. Li
et al. (2015) investigate how many experiments are needed to set prices in a product
category, as the size of the category grows. Setting prices across a product category
requires estimating a large matrix of cross-product demand elasticities (because items in
the same category may be substitutes or complements). They show that if the category
has a favorable structure, the number of experiments needed may grow just logarithmically with the number of products. They conclude that ﬁrms may be able to obtain
meaningful estimates using a practically feasible number of experiments, even in
categories with a large number of products. To our knowledge, this is the only paper
that formally investigates when it is feasible to optimize marketing variables using ﬁeld
experiments alone. However, this paper presents theoretical results using information
theory; it does not report the results of any ﬁeld experiments.

8. CONCLUSIONS
Field experiments are no longer a rarity in the marketing literature. The sharp growth in
the number of papers, particularly in the last 5 years, means that they are now a mainstream method for undertaking empirical research. The growth in the number of papers
is matched by tremendous growth in the number of authors who are participating in
these studies. Between 1995 and 1999, just 11 authors authored or coauthored a paper

Field Experiments in Marketing

using a ﬁeld experiment (in our sample). Between 2010 and 2014, there were 75 authors
represented.12
There appear to be at least three reasons for this growth in the number of ﬁeld
experiment papers. First, the marketing ﬁeld has become increasingly concerned about
the interpretation of endogenous independent variables. This concern does not arise if
experimental treatments are exogenously manipulated. Second, the ﬁeld has grown
generally, and so there are more papers of all types being published. Third, the Internet
has made it easier to implement ﬁeld experiments, often without the need for cooperation from ﬁrms.
Our survey reveals that before 2010, ﬁeld experiment papers in marketing were
dominated by pricing topics. Since 2010, at least some of this focus has shifted from pricing to advertising, with many of the recent papers investigating topics related to Internet
advertising. However, even within the pricing and advertising topics, there is a remarkable level of diversity in the research questions. Very few of the papers build on a previous
ﬁeld experiment paper. We recognize this as both a strength and weakness of the ﬁeld.
An important criterion for publishing a ﬁeld experiment in a top marketing journal is
the ability to extend the ﬁndings beyond documenting a main effect and to also provide
insights about the cause of that effect. Although explaining effects is obviously valued in
economics journals, this objective receives even greater emphasis in the marketing ﬁeld.
Field experiments are not always well-suited to evaluating competing explanations. For
this reason, many of the papers report interactions, rather than just main effects. Other
researchers complement their ﬁeld experiments with laboratory experiments or customer
surveys to provide support for their interpretations.
Although an explanation for an effect is generally necessary, randomization is not.
Almost 30% of the ﬁeld experiments published in marketing do not employ randomization to assign experimental treatments. When treatments are not randomized, they are
generally rotated over time. We also identiﬁed three papers that report ﬁeld experiments
using matched sets of products auctioned on eBay.
Although we have highlighted the diversity in topics, our review also identiﬁed
several topics that are yet to receive attention. These include the problems of motivating
and coordinating upstream and downstream channel relationships. There are also very
few studies of business-to-business markets. Finally, we recognized that ﬁeld experiments
are themselves an optimization method; ﬁrms could use ﬁeld experiments to improve
proﬁts by searching across the space of possible decisions. Although there is some initial
theoretical work in this area, the feasibility of using ﬁeld experiments in this role remains
an important but understudied topic.

12

Across all 20 years there are 123 unique authors or coauthors of papers in the sample.

489

490

Handbook of Field Experiments

APPENDIX: SUMMARY OF THE PAPERS
Pricing issues
Who to target with discounts?

Avoid sending discounts to customers who previously
paid full price
Avoid offering discounts to customers who are more
sensitive to quality than price
Deep discounts have a more favorable long-term
impact for new customers than for existing
customers

Dholakia (2006)
Anderson and Simester (2001a)
Anderson and Simester (2004)

What types of discounts are most effective?

More than 50% of the promotions are unproﬁtable
because the loss of margin is not fully offset by the
incremental sales
Coupons are more effective for increasing sales and
proﬁts than discounts off the regular price
Multiple unit promotions (e.g., 2 for $1.50) are more
effective than single unit promotions (75 cents
each). Larger quantity limits increase the number of
units that customers buy
Framing a discount as “50% more free” is more
effective than “33% off the regular price”
The optimal design of a coupon depends upon the
customer’s psychological orientation
Free samples can lead to positive long-term demand
effects
A sequence of increasing customer bonuses is more
effective at driving usage and retention than a
sequence of decreasing bonuses
Longer deadlines on gift cards lead to lower
redemption rates
Uncertainty about a free gift can inﬂuence the
effectiveness of promotions, depending upon
whether customers are primed to make emotional
or thoughtful decisions
Returning promoted prices to regular levels gradually
will generate more demand
Promotions that extend store trips can lead to an
increase in unplanned expenditure
Training customers to appreciate the beneﬁts of the
product can be more effective than promotions

Ailawadi et al. (2007)

Dhar and Hoch (1996)
Wansink et al. (1998)

Chen et al. (2012)
Ramanathan and Dhar (2010)
Bawa and Shoemaker (2004)
Haisley and Loewenstein (2011)

Shu and Gneezy (2010)
Laran and Tsiros (2013)

Tsiros and Hardesty (2010)
Hui et al. (2013)
Gaurav et al. (2011)

Field Experiments in Marketing

Price as a signal

Nine-digit price endings can signal a price is
discounted, particularly for new products
“Sale” signs are a less credible signal when they are
used too often
Higher prices set higher expectations, and so
customers evaluate a low-quality product more
negatively when it has a higher price
Promotions can lower demand by signaling that a
product is suitable for customers who are more
sensitive to quality than price
Using discounts to attract ﬁrst-time customers can
make these customers more loyal by signaling that
the ﬁrm offers good value

Anderson and Simester (2003)
Anderson and Simester (2001b)
Gneezy et al. (2014)

Anderson and Simester (2001a)

Anderson and Simester (2004)

Multipart tariffs and other schemes

Customers evaluate outcomes within a period, rather
than across the entire contract
A multipart pricing system can lower demand if
customers interpret it as unfair
When designing a revenue maximizing two-part tariff
in the telecommunications market, it is important
to account for both usage and customer retention,
as solely focusing on usage will substantially
underestimate the sensitivity of revenue to price
Consumers are surprisingly short term focused when
choosing between linear price schemes and threepart tariffs
How do customers respond to a pay-what-you-want
pricing scheme?

Lambrecht and Tucker (2012)
Anderson and Simester (2008)
Danaher (2002)

Yao et al. (2012)

Kim et al. (2009)

Advertising issues
Is there an impact on purchasing?

It takes a lot of data to measure the impact of Internet
advertising on consumer spending
Retargeting is generally ineffective, unless consumers
are close to purchasing
DVR’s do not appear to affect household spending
Competitors’ advertising can increase your demand

Lewis and Riley (2014)
Lambrecht and Tucker (2013)
Bronnenberg et al. (2010)
Anderson and Simester (2013)
Continued

491

492

Handbook of Field Experiments

Which messages are most effective?

Framing an appeal as a self-prediction increases its
effectiveness
Matching the type of appeal with a focus on either
individual versus social beneﬁts can improve
advertising effectiveness
Highlighting the beneﬁts of targeting is less effective
than emphasizing reciprocity for free access
Control over personalization can make personalized
advertisements more effective
Markets with more competitors can appear more
attractive to entrants, as there must be sufﬁcient
demand to attract so many competitors
Advertising popularity information can beneﬁt niche
brands because customers recognize that these
brands must offer high quality to overcome their
narrow reach
Appeals to explicitly compare an offer with
competing offers produces more cautious bidding
behavior in auctions
The effect of advertising on word-of-mouth is
stronger for those who do not already associate the
brand with the message
Assertive messaging is more effective if customers
believe in the cause but less effective if they are not
yet convinced

Spangenberg et al. (2003)
White and Simpson (2013)

Schumann et al. (2014)
Tucker (2014)
Tucker and Zhang (2010)

Tucker and Zhang (2011)

Dholakia and Simonson (2005)

Berger and Schwartz (2011)

Kronrod et al. (2012)

Optimizing paid search advertising

Clicks and revenues for organic search are higher in
the presence of paid search
Clicks decrease with search position but conversion
may increase with search position

Yang and Ghose (2010)
Agarwal et al. (2011)

Market research and product development issues
Market research

Mere measurement of purchase intentions may increase the
correlation between stated purchase intentions and
actual purchase probabilities
Participation in customer satisfaction surveys increases
subsequent purchase likelihoods

Chandon et al. (2005)

Borle et al. (2007)

Field Experiments in Marketing

Multimedia computer interactions can realistically portray
customer’s information sources and provide forecasts
that are not signiﬁcantly different from traditional
methods
An optimal contact model for increasing response rates to
online marketing research panels

Urban et al. (1997)

Neslin et al. (2009)

Product sizes and bundling

If a customer needs a ﬁxed quantity, they will purchase
more units when the product is in a round package
compared to a square package of equal volume
Bundling substitutes or unrelated items in an auction is less
proﬁtable than selling them separately, but bundling is
more proﬁtable for complementary products
Multiple unit promotions (e.g., 2 for $1.50) are more
effective than single unit promotions (75 cents each)

Krider et al. (2001)

Leszczyc and Haubl (2010)

Wansink et al. (1998)

Validating optimization models
Pricing models

Category pricing of automobile parts
Scholarships and university admission decisions

Mantrala et al. (2006)
Belloni et al. (2012)

Advertising models

Optimizing search engine advertising bids
An advertising contact model for catalog mailing
Estimating the incremental impact of marketing
activities in different channels
Banner-advertising optimization

Skiera and Nabout (2013)
Simester et al. (2006)
Li and Kannan (2014)
Urban et al. (2014)

Market research and product development models

Increasing response rates to online marketing research
panels
Forecasting customer demand for really new products

Neslin et al. (2009)
Urban et al. (1997)

Other topics
Sales force optimization

Coordinating sales calls to match forecasts of customers’
purchasing decisions can increase proﬁts
Sales force and sales contest should include multiple
prize winners, and rank ordering prices in contests
with multiple winners do not increase sales or
revenues

Kumar et al. (2008)
Lim et al. (2009)

Continued

493

494

Handbook of Field Experiments

Word-of-mouth and referrals

Word-of-mouth is more effective at increasing sales if
it comes from relatively less loyal customers and from
acquaintances instead of friends
Which customers should a ﬁrm target when designing
customer referral programs?

Godes and Mayzlin (2009)

Kumar et al. (2010)

Participation in an online community

Participation in an online community leads to less
spending and fewer listings
Participation in an online community makes customers
more willing to engage in risky bidding behavior,
particularly when ties to other community members
are strong.
Users contribute to Twitter because they care about
how people perceive them, rather than because they
derive intrinsic utility from the activity

Algesheimer et al. (2010)
Zhu et al. (2012)

Toubia and Stephen (2013)

Encouraging positive behaviors

Competitions, pledges, and incentives can all improve
children’s food choices
Earmarking earnings can increase savings rates

Raju et al. (2010)
Soman and Cheema (2011)

Other

Remodeling a retail space increases sales more for new
customers than established customers
Auction outcomes can be inﬂuenced by shipping costs,
secret reserve prices, and other auction features

Dagger and Danaher (2014)
Haruvy and Leszczyc (2010)

REFERENCES
Agarwal, A., Hosanagar, K., Smith, M.D., December 2011. Location, location, location: an analysis of profitability of position in online advertising markets. J. Mark. Res. XLVIII, 1057e1073.
Ailawadi, K.L., Harlam, B.A., Cesar, J., Trounce, D., 2007. Quantifying and improving promotion effectiveness at CVS. Mark. Sci. 26 (4), 566e575.
Alexandre, B., Lovett, M.J., Boulding, W., Staelin, R., 2012. Optimal admission and scholarship decisions;
choosing customized marketing offers to attract a desirable mix of customers. Mark. Sci. 31 (4),
621e636.
Algesheimer, R., Borle, S., Dholakia, U.M., Singh, S.S., 2010. The impact of customer community participation on customer behaviors: an empirical investigation. Mark. Sci. 29 (4), 756e769.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 1998. The role of sale signs. Mark. Sci. 17 (2), 139e155.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2001a. Research note: price discrimination as a signal: why an offer to spread
payments may hurt demand. Mark. Sci. 20 (3), 315e327.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2001b. Are sale signs less effective when more products have them? Mark.
Sci. 20 (2), 121e142.

Field Experiments in Marketing

Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2003. Effects of $9 price endings on retail sales: evidence from ﬁeld
experiments. Quantitative Mark. Econ. 1 (1), 93e110.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2004. Long run effects of promotion depth on new versus established customers: three ﬁeld studies. Mark. Sci. 23 (1), 4e20.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2008. Research note: does demand fall when customers perceive that prices
are unfair? the case of premium pricing for large sizes. Mark. Sci. 27 (3), 492e500.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2010. Price stickiness and customer antagonism. Q. J. Econ. 125 (2),
729e765.
Anderson, E.T., Simester, D.I., 2013. Advertising in a competitive market: the role of product standards,
customer learning and switching costs. J. Mark. Res. 50 (4), 489e504.
Bawa, K., Shoemaker, R., 2004. The effects of free sample promotions on incremental brand sales. Mark.
Sci. 23 (3), 345e363.
Berger, J., Schwarz, E.M., October 2011. What drives immediate and ongoing word of mouth. J. Mark. Res.
XLVIII, 869e880.
Borle, S., Dholakia, U.M., Siddharth, S.S., Westbrook, R.A., 2007. The impact of survey participation on
subsequent customer behavior: an empirical investigation. Mark. Sci. 26 (5), 711e726.
Bronnenberg, B.J., Dube, J.-P., Mela, C.F., 2010. Do digital video recorders inﬂuence sales? J. Mark. Res.
XLVII, 998e1010.
Chandon, P., Morwitz, V.G., Reinartz, W.J., April 2005. Do intentions really predict behavior? selfgenerated validity effects in survey research. J. Mark. 69, 1e14.
Chen, H., Marmorstein, H., Tsiros, M., Rao, A.R., July 2012. When more is less: the impact of base value
neglect on consumer preferences for bonus packs over price discounts. J. Mark. 76, 64e77.
Curhan, R.C., 1974. The effects of merchandising and temporary promotional activities on the sales of fresh
fruits and vegetables in supermarkets. J. Mark. Res. XI, 286e294.
Dagger, T.S., Danaher, P.J., May 2014. Comparing the effect of store remodeling on new and existing
customers. J. Mark. 78, 62e80.
Danaher, P.J., 2002. Optimal pricing of new subscription services: analysis of a market experiment. Mark.
Sci. 21 (2), 119e138.
Dhar, S., Hoch, S.J., January 1996. Price discrimination using in-store merchandising. J. Mark. 17e30.
Dholakia, U.M., Simonson, I., 2005. The effect of explicit reference points on consumer choice and online
bidding behavior. Mark. Sci. 24 (2), 206e217.
Dholakia, U.M., February 2006. How customer self-determination inﬂuences relational marketing outcomes: evidence from longitudinal ﬁeld studies. J. Mark. Res. XLIII, 109e120.
Dube, J.-P., Luo, X., Fang, Z., 2016. Self-signaling and prosocial behavior: A cause marketing experiment.
working paper, University of Chicago.
Eskin, G.J., Baron, P.H., 1977. Effects of price and advertising in test-market experiments. J. Mark. Res.
XIV, 499e508.
Gaurav, S., Cole, S., Tobacman, J., 2011. Marketing complex ﬁnancial products in emerging markets: evidence from rainfall insurance in India. J. Mark. Res. XLVIII, S150eS162. Special Issue 2011.
Gneezy, A., Gneezy, U., Lauga, D.O., April 2014. A reference-dependent model of the price-quality
heuristic. J. Mark. Res. LI, 153e164.
Godes, D., Mayzlin, D., 2009. Firm-created-word-of-mouth communication: evidence from a ﬁeld test.
Mark. Sci. 28 (4), 721e739.
Guadagni, P.M., Little, J.D.C., 1983. A logit model of brand choice calibrated on scanner data. Mark. Sci. 2
(3), 203e238.
Haisley, E., Loewenstein, G., February 2011. It’s not what you get but when you get it: the effect of gift sequence
on deposit balances and customer sentiment in a commercial bank. J. Mark. Res. XLVIII, 103e115.
Haruvy, E., Peter, T., Popkowski, L., 2010. Search and choice in online consumer auctions. Mark. Sci. 29
(6), 1152e1164.
Hui, S.K., Inman, J.J., Huang, Y., Suher, J., March 2013. The effect of in-store travel distance on unplanned
spending: applications to mobile promotion strategies. J. Mark. 77, 1e16.
Kim, J.-Y., Natter, M., Spann, M., January 2009. Pay what you want: a new participative pricing
mechanism. J. Mark. 73, 44e58.

495

496

Handbook of Field Experiments

Krider, R.E., Priya, R., Aradhna, K., 2001. Pizzas: p or square? psychological biases in area comparisons.
Mark. Sci. 20 (4), 405e425.
Kronrod, A., Grinstein, A., Wathieu, L., 2012. Go green! Should environmental messages Be so assertive?
J. Mark. 76, 95e102.
Kumar, V., Venkatesan, R., Reinartz, W., September 2008. Performance implications of adopting a
customer-focused sales campaign. J. Mark. 72, 50e68.
Kumar, V., Andrew Peterson, J., Leone, R.P., September 2010. Driving proﬁtability by encouraging
customer referrals: who, when, and how. J. Mark. 74, 1e17.
Lambrecht, A., Tucker, C., 2012. Paying with money or effort: pricing when customers anticipate hassle.
J. Mark. Res. XLIX, 66e82.
Lambrecht, A., Tucker, C., October 2013. When does retargeting work? information speciﬁcity in online
advertising. J. Mark. Res. L, 561e576.
Laran, J., Tsiros, M., 2013. An investigation of the effectiveness of uncertainty in marketing promotions
involving free gifts. J. Mark. 77, 112e123.
Leszczyc, P.T.L.P., Ha€
ubl, G., 2010. To bundle or not to bundle: determinants of the proﬁtability of multiitem auctions. J. Mark. 74, 110e124.
Lewis, R.A., Reiley, D.H., 2014. Online ads and ofﬂine sales: measuring the effects of retail advertising via a
controlled experiment. Quantitative Mark. Econ. 12, 235e266.
Li, H., Kannan, P.K., February 2014. Attributing conversions in a multichannel online marketing environment: an empirical model and a ﬁeld experiment. J. Mark. Res. LI, 40e56.
Li, J.Q., Rusmevichientong, P., Simester, D.I., Tsitsiklis, J.N., Zoumpoulis, S.I., 2015. The value of ﬁeld
experiments. Manag. Sci. 61 (7), 1722e1740.
Lim, N., Ahearne, M.J., Ham, S.H., 2009. Designing sales contests: does the prize structure matter? J. Mark.
Res. XLVI, 356e371.
Mantrala, M.K., Seetharaman, P.B., Kaul, R., Gopalakrishna, S., Stam, A., November 2006. Optimal
pricing strategies for an automotive aftermarket retailer. J. Mark. Res. XLIII, 588e604.
Mannor, S., Simester, D.I., Sun, P., Tsitsiklis, J.N., 2007. Bias and Variance in Value Function Estimates.
Manag. Sci. 53 (2), 308e322.
Neslin, S.A., Novak, T.P., Baker, K.R., Hoffman, D.L., 2009. An optimal contact model for maximizing
online panel response rates. Manag. Sci. 55 (5), 727e737.
Raju, S., Rajagopal, P., Gilbride, T.J., May 2010. Marketing healthful eating to children: the effectiveness of
incentives, pledges and competitions. J. Mark. 74, 93e106.
Ramanathan, S., Dhar, S.K., June 2010. The effect of sales promotions on the size and composition of the
shopping basket: regulatory compatibility from framing and temporal restrictions. J. Mark. Res. XLVII,
542e552.
Schumann, J.H., von Wangenheim, F., Groene, N., January 2014. Targeted online advertising: using reciprocity appeals to increase acceptance among users of free web services. J. Mark. 78, 59e75.
Shu, S.B., Gneezy, A., October 2010. Procrastination of enjoyable experiences. J. Mark. Res. XLVII,
933e944.
Simester, D.I., Sun, P., Tsitsiklis, J.N., 2006. Dynamic catalog mailing policies. Manag. Sci. 52 (5), 683e696.
Skiera, B., Nabout, N.A., 2013. PROSAD: a bidding decision support system for proﬁt optimizing search
engine advertising. Mark. Sci. 32 (2), 213e220.
Soman, D., Cheema, A., 2011. Earmarking and partitioning: increasing saving by low-income households.
J. Mark. Res. XLVIII, S14eS22. Special Issue 2011.
Song, Y., Mela, C.F., Chiang, J., Chen, Y., December 2012. Determining consumers’ discount rates with
ﬁeld studies. J. Mark. Res. XLIX, 822e841.
Spangenberg, E.R., Sprott, D.E., Grohmann, B., Smith, R.J., July 2003. Mass-communicated prediction requests: practical application and a cognitive dissonance explanation for self-prophecy. J. Mark. 67,
47e62.
Toubia, O., Stephen, A.T., 2013. Intrinsic vs. image-related utility in social media: why do people
contribute content to twitter? Mark. Sci. 32 (3), 368e392.
Tsiros, M., Hardesty, D.M., January 2010. Ending a price promotion: retracting it in one step or phasing it
out gradually. J. Mark. 74, 49e64.

Field Experiments in Marketing

Tucker, C.E., Zhang, J., 2010. Growing two-sided networks by advertising the user base: a ﬁeld experiment.
Mark. Sci. 29 (5), 805e814.
Tucker, C.E., Zhang, J., 2011. How does popularity information affect choices? a ﬁeld experiment. Manag.
Sci. 57 (5), 828e842.
Tucker, C.E., October 2014. Social networks, personalized advertising, and privacy controls. J. Mark. Res.
LI, 546e562.
Urban, G.L., Hauser, J.R., Qualls, W.J., Weinberg, B.D., Bohlmann, J.D., Chicos, R.A., February 1997.
Information acceleration: validations and lessons from the ﬁeld. J. Mark. Res. XXXIV, 143e153.
Urban, G.L., Liberali, G., MacDonald, E., Bordley, R., Hauser, J.R., 2014. Morphing banner advertising.
Mark. Sci. 33 (1), 27e46.
Villas-Boas, M.J., Winer, R.S., 1999. Endogeneity in brand choice models. Manag. Sci. 45 (10),
1324e1338.
Wansink, B., Kent, R.J., Hoch, S.J., February 1998. An anchoring and adjustment model of purchase quantity decisions. J. Mark. Res. XXXV, 71e81.
White, K., Simpson, B., March 2013. When do (and don’t) normative appeals inﬂuence sustainable consumer behaviors? J. Mark. 77, 78e95.
Yang, S., Ghose, A., 2010. Analyzing the relationship between organic and sponsored search advertising:
positive, negative or zero independence? Mark. Sci. 29 (4), 602e623.
Zhu, R., Dholakia, U.M., Xinlei (Jack), C., Algesheimer, R., June 2012. Does online community participation foster risky ﬁnancial behavior? J. Mark. Res. XLIX, 394e407.

497

