I

Indirect Inference
Anthony A. Smith, Jr.

probability models; Maximum likelihood;
Models; Probability density functions;
Reduced-form models; Seminonparametric
(SNP) models; Simulated moments estimation;
Simultaneous equations; Vector autoregressions; Wald test

Abstract

Indirect inference is a simulation-based
method for estimating the parameters of economic models. Its hallmark is the use of an
auxiliary model to capture aspects of the data
upon which to base the estimation. The parameters of the auxiliary model can be estimated
using either the observed data or data simulated from the economic model. Indirect inference chooses the parameters of the economic
model so that these two estimates of the parameters of the auxiliary model are as close as
possible. The auxiliary model need not be correctly speciﬁed; when it is, indirect inference is
equivalent to maximum likelihood.

Keywords

Auxiliary models; Bayesian inference; Criterion functions; Discrete-choice models;
Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
(DSGE) models; Estimation; Lagrange multipliers; Likelihood; Likelihood ratios; Linear
This chapter was originally published in The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, 2008. Edited by
Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume

JEL Classifications

C52
Indirect inference is a simulation-based method
for estimating, or making inferences about, the
parameters of economic models. It is most useful
in estimating models for which the likelihood
function (or any other criterion function that
might form the basis of estimation) is analytically
intractable or too difﬁcult to evaluate. Such
models abound in modern economic analysis
and include nonlinear dynamic models, models
with latent (or unobserved) variables, and models
with missing or incomplete data.
Like other simulation-based methods, indirect
inference requires only that it be possible to simulate data from the economic model for different
values of its parameters. Unlike other simulationbased methods, indirect inference uses an approximate, or auxiliary, model to form a criterion function. The auxiliary model does not need to be an
accurate description of the data generating process. Instead, the auxiliary model serves as a window through which to view both the actual,

# The Author(s) 2008
Palgrave Macmillan (ed.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
DOI 10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_2509-1

2

Indirect Inference

observed data and the simulated data generated by
the economic model: it selects aspects of the data
upon which to focus the analysis.
The goal of indirect inference is to choose the
parameters of the economic model so that the
observed data and the simulated data look the
same from the vantage point of the chosen window (or auxiliary model). In practice, the auxiliary
model is itself characterized by a set of parameters. These parameters can themselves be estimated using either the observed data or the
simulated data. Indirect inference chooses the
parameters of the underlying economic model so
that these two sets of estimates of the parameters
of the auxiliary model are as close as possible.

A Formal Definition
To put these ideas in concrete form, suppose that
the economic model takes the form:
yt ¼ Gðyt1 , xt , ut ; bÞ, t ¼ 1, 2, . . . , T,

(1)

where fxt gTt¼1 is a sequence of observed exogenous variables, fyt gTt¼1 is a sequence of observed
endogenous variables, and fut gTt¼1 is a sequence of
unobserved random errors. Assume that the initial
value y0 is known and that the random errors are
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
with a known probability distribution F.
Equation (1) determines, in effect, a probability
density function for yt conditional on yt–1 and xt.
Indirect inference does not require analytical tractability of this density, relying instead on numerical simulation of the economic model. This is not
the most general model that indirect inference can
accommodate – indirect inference can be used to
estimate virtually any model from which it is
possible to simulate data – but it is a useful starting
point for understanding the principles underlying
indirect inference. The econometrician seeks to
use the observed data to estimate the
k-dimensional parameter vector b.
The auxiliary model, in turn, is deﬁned by a
conditional probability density function, f(yt |yt–1,
xt, 0), which depends on a p-dimensional parameter vector y. In a typical application of indirect

inference, this density has a convenient analytical
expression. The number of parameters in the auxiliary model must be at least as large as the number
of parameters in the economic model (that is,
p  k).
The auxiliary model is, in general, incorrectly
speciﬁed: that is, the density f need not describe
accurately the conditional distribution of yt determined by Eq. (1). Nonetheless, the parameters of
the auxiliary model can be estimated using the
observed data by maximizing the log of the likelihood function deﬁned by f:
^y ¼ arg max
y

T
X

log f ðyt j yt1 , xt , yÞ:

t¼1

The estimated parameter vector ^y serves as a set
of ‘statistics’ that capture, or summarize, certain
features of the observed data; indirect inference
chooses the parameters of the economic model to
reproduce this set of statistics as closely as
possible.
The parameters of the auxiliary model can also
be estimated using simulated data generated by
the economic model. First, using a random number generator, draw a sequence of random errors
 m T
u~t t¼1 from the distribution F. Typically, indirect inference uses M such sequences, so the
superscript m indicates the number of the simulation. These sequences are drawn only once and
then held ﬁxed throughout the estimation procedure. Second, pick a parameter vector b and then
iterate on Eq. (1), using the observed exogenous
variables and the simulated random errors, to generate asimulated
T sequence of endogenous variables: y~m
ð
b
Þ
, where the dependence of this
t
t¼1
simulated sequence on b is made explicit. Third
and ﬁnally, maximize the average of the log of the
likelihood across the M simulations to obtain:
^
y ðbÞ ¼ arg max
y

M X
T
X



~m
log f y~m
t ðbÞj y
t1 ðbÞ, xt , y :

m¼1 t¼1

The central idea of indirect inference is to
choose b so that ^y ðbÞ and ^y are as close as possible.
When the economic model is exactly identiﬁed

Indirect Inference

(that is, when p = k), it is, in general, possible to
choose b so that the economic model reproduces
exactly the estimated parameters of the auxiliary
model. Typically, though, the economic model is
over-identiﬁed (that is, p > k): in this case, it is
necessary to choose a metric for measuring the
distance between ^
y and ^
y ðbÞ; indirect inference
then picks b to minimize this distance.
As the observed sample size T grows large
(with M held ﬁxed), the estimated parameter vector in the simulated data, ^
y ðbÞ , converges to a
so-called ‘pseudo-true value’ that depends on b;
call it h(b). The function h is sometimes called the
binding function: it maps the parameters of the
economic model into the parameters of the auxiliary model. Similarly, the estimated parameter
vector in the observed data, ^
y , converges to a
pseudo-true value y0. In the limit as T grows
large, then, indirect inference chooses b to satisfy
the equation y0 = h(b). Under the assumption that
the observed data is generated by the economic
model for a particular value, b0, of its parameter
vector, the value of b that satisﬁes this equation is
precisely b0. This heuristic argument explains
why indirect inference generates consistent estimates of the parameters of the economic model.

Three Examples
Example 1: A Simple System of Simultaneous
Equations
The ﬁrst example is drawn from the classical
literature on simultaneous equations to which
indirect inference is, in many ways, a close
cousin. Consider a simple macroeconomic
model, adapted from Johnston (1984), with two
simultaneous equations: Ct = bYt + ut and Yt = Ct
+ Xt. In this model, consumption expenditure in
period t, Ct, and output (or income) in period t, Yt,
are endogenous, whereas nonconsumption expenditure in period t, Xt, is exogenous. Assume that
the random error ut is i.i.d. and normally distributed with mean zero and a known variance; the
only unknown parameter, then, is b.
There are many ways to estimate b without
using indirect inference, but this example is useful
for illustrating how indirect inference works. To

3

wit, suppose that the auxiliary model speciﬁes that
Ct is normally distributed with conditional mean
yXt and a ﬁxed variance. In this simple example,
the binding function can be computed without
using simulation: a little algebra reveals that
y = b/(1 – b)  h(b). To estimate b, ﬁrst use
ordinary least squares (which is equivalent to
maximum likelihood in this example) to obtain a
consistent estimate, ^y , of y. Then evaluate the
inverse of h at ^y to obtain a consistent estimate
^ ¼ ^y= 1 þ ^y . This is precisely the indiof b : b
rect inference estimator of b. This estimator uses
an indirect approach: it ﬁrst estimates an auxiliary
(or, in the language of simultaneous equations, a
reduced-form) model whose parameters are complicated functions of the parameters of the underlying economic model and then works backwards
to recover estimates of these parameters.
Example 2: A General Equilibrium Model
of the Macroeconomy
In this example, the economic model is a dynamic,
stochastic, general equilibrium (DSGE) model of
the macroeconomy (for a prototype, see Hansen
1985). Given choices for the parameters describing the economic environment, this class of
models determines the evolution of aggregate
macroeconomic time series such as output, consumption, and the capital stock. The law of
motion for these variables implied by the economic model is, in general, nonlinear. In addition,
some of the key variables in this law of motion
(for example, the capital stock) are poorly measured or even unobserved. For these reasons, in
these models it is often difﬁcult to obtain a
closedform expression for the likelihood function.
To surmount these obstacles, indirect inference
can be used to obtain estimates of the parameters
of the economic model. A natural choice for the
auxiliary model is a vector autoregression (VAR)
for the variables of interest. As an example, let yt
be a vector containing the values of output and
consumption in period t (expressed as deviations
from steady-state values) and let the VAR for yt
have one lag: yt+1 = Ayt + et+1, where the ets are
normally distributed, i.i.d. random variables with
mean 0 and covariance matrix S.

4

In this example, the binding function maps the
parameters of the economic model into the parameters A and S of the VAR. To obtain a simulated
approximation to the binding function, pick a set
of parameters for the economic model, compute
the law of motion implied by this set of parameters, simulate data using this law of motion, and
then use OLS to ﬁt a VAR to the simulated data.
Indirect inference chooses the parameters of the
economic model so that the VAR parameters
implied by the model are as close as possible to
the VAR parameters estimated using observed
macroeconomic time series. Smith (1993) illustrates the use of indirect inference to estimate
DSGE models.
Example 3: A Discrete-Choice Model
In this example, the economic model describes the
behaviour of a decision-maker who must choose
one of several discrete alternatives. These models
typically specify a random utility for each alternative; the decision-maker is assumed to pick the
alternative with the highest utility. The random
utilities are latent: the econometrician does not
observe them, but does observe the decisionmaker’s choice. Except in special cases, evaluating the likelihood of the observed discrete choices
requires the evaluation of high-dimensional integrals which do not have closed-form expressions.
To use indirect inference to estimate discretechoice models, one possible choice for the auxiliary model is a linear probability model. In this
case, the binding function maps the parameters
describing the probability distribution of the latent
random utilities into the parameters of the linear
probability model. Indirect inference chooses the
parameters of the economic model so that the
estimated parameters of the linear probability
model using the observed data are as close as
possible to those obtained using the simulated
data. Implementing indirect inference in discretechoice models poses a potentially difﬁcult computational problem because it requires the optimization of a non-smooth objective function. Keane
and Smith (2003), who illustrate the use of indirect inference to estimate discrete-choice models,
also suggest a way to smooth the objective
surface.

Indirect Inference

Three Metrics
To implement indirect inference when the economic model is over-identiﬁed, it is necessary to
choose a metric for measuring the distance
between the auxiliary model parameters estimated
using the observed data and the simulated data,
respectively. There are three possibilities
corresponding to the three classical hypothesis
tests: Wald, likelihood ratio (LR), and Lagrange
multiplier (LM).
In the Wald approach, the indirect inference
estimator of the parameters of the economic
model minimizes a quadratic form in the difference between the two vectors of estimated
parameters:

0 

^ Wald ¼ arg min ^y  ^y ðbÞ W ^y  ^y ðbÞ ,
b
b

where W is a positive deﬁnite ‘weighting’
matrix.
The LR approach to indirect inference forms a
metric using the (approximate) likelihood function deﬁned by the auxiliary model. In particular,
^ LR ¼ arg min
b
b

T
X
t¼1

!
T

 X


log f yt j yt1 , xt ,^y 
log f yt j yt1 , xt , ^y ðbÞ : :
t¼1

By the deﬁnition of ^y, the objective function on
the right-hand side is non-negative, and its value
approaches zero as ^y ðbÞ approaches ^y . The LR
approach to indirect inference chooses b so as to
make this value as close to zero as possible.
Because the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side
does not depend on b, the LR approach can also
be viewed as maximizing the approximate likelihood subject to the restrictions, summarized (for
large T) by the binding function h, that the economic model imposes on the parameters of the
auxiliary model.
Finally, the LM approach to indirect inference
forms a metric using the derivative (or score) of
the log of the likelihood function deﬁned by the
auxiliary model. In particular,

Indirect Inference

5

^ LM ¼ arg min SðbÞ0 V SðbÞ,
b
b

where
SðbÞ ¼

M X
T


X
@
^
log f y~m
t ðbÞ, xt ,y
@y
m1 t¼1

and V is a positive deﬁnite matrix. By deﬁnition, ^
y sets the score in the observed data to zero.
The goal of the LM approach, then, is to choose b
so that the (average) score in the simulated data,
evaluated at ^
y, is as close to zero as possible.
For any number, M, of simulated data-sets, all
three approaches deliver consistent and asymptotically normal estimates of b as T grows large. The
use of simulation inﬂates asymptotic standard
errors by the factor (1 + M–1)1/2 ; for M  10,
this factor is negligible. When the economic
model is exactly identiﬁed, all three approaches
to indirect inference yield numerically identical
estimates; in this case, they all choose b to solve
^
y ðbÞ ¼ ^
y.
When the economic model is over-identiﬁed,
the minimized values of the three metrics are, in
general, greater than zero. These minimized
values can be used to test the hypothesis that the
economic model is correctly speciﬁed: sufﬁciently large minimized values constitute evidence against the economic model.
If the weighting matrices W and V are chosen
appropriately, then the Wald and LM approaches
are asymptotically equivalent in the sense that
they have the same asymptotic covariance matrix;
by contrast, the LR approach, in general, has a
larger asymptotic covariance matrix. If, however,
the auxiliary model is correctly speciﬁed, then all
three approaches are asymptotically equivalent
not only to each other but also to maximum likelihood (for large M). Because maximum likelihood is asymptotically efﬁcient (that is, its
asymptotic covariance matrix is as small as possible), the LM approach is sometimes called the
‘efﬁcient method of moments’ when the auxiliary
model is close to being correctly speciﬁed; in such
a case, this name could also be applied to the Wald
approach.

When estimating the parameters of the auxiliary model is difﬁcult or timeconsuming, the LM
approach has an important computational advantage over the other two approaches. In particular,
it does not require that the auxiliary model be
estimated repeatedly for different values of the
parameters of the economic model. To estimate
continuous-time models of asset prices, for example, Gallant and Tauchen (2005) advocate using a
semi-nonparametric (SNP) model as the auxiliary
model. As the number of its parameters increases,
an SNP model provides an arbitrarily accurate
approximation to the data generating process,
thereby permitting indirect inference to approach
the asymptotic efﬁciency of maximum likelihood.
For this class of auxiliary models, which are nonlinear and often have a large number of parameters, the LM approach is a computationally
attractive way to implement indirect inference.

Concluding Remarks
Indirect inference is a simulation-based method
for estimating the parameters of economic
models. Like other simulation-based methods,
such as simulated moments estimation (see, for
example, Dufﬁe and Singleton 1993), it requires
little analytical tractability, relying instead on
numerical simulation of the economic model.
Unlike other methods, the ‘moments’ that guide
the estimation of the parameters of the economic
model are themselves the parameters of an auxiliary model. If the auxiliary model comes close to
providing a correct statistical description of the
economic model, then indirect inference comes
close to matching the asymptotic efﬁciency of
maximum likelihood. In many applications, however, the auxiliary model is chosen, not to provide
a good statistical description of the economic
model, but instead to select important features of
the data upon which to focus the analysis.
There is a large literature on indirect inference,
much of which is beyond the scope of this article.
Gouriéroux and Monfort (1996) provide a useful
survey of indirect inference. Indirect inference
was ﬁrst introduced by Smith (1990, 1993) and
later extended in important ways by Gouriéroux

6

et al. (1993) and Gallant and Tauchen (1996).
Although indirect inference is a classical estimation method, Gallant and McCulloch (2004) show
how ideas from indirect inference can be used to
conduct Bayesian inference in models with intractable likelihood functions. There have been many
interesting applications of indirect inference to the
estimation of economic models, mainly in
ﬁnance, macroeconomics, and labour economics.
Because of its ﬂexibility, indirect inference can be
a useful way to estimate models in all areas of
economics.

See Also
▶ Maximum Likelihood

Bibliography
Dufﬁe, D., and K.J. Singleton. 1993. Simulated moments
estimation of Markov models of asset prices.
Econometrica 61: 929–952.

Indirect Inference
Gallant, A.R., and R. McCulloch. 2004. On the determination of general scientiﬁc models. Working paper. Fuqua
School of Business/Duke University.
Gallant, A.R., and G. Tauchen. 1996. Which moments to
match? Econometric Theory 12: 657–681.
Gallant, A.R., and G. Tauchen. 2005. Simulated score
methods and indirect inference for continuous-time
models.
In
Handbook
of
ﬁnancial
econometrics, ed. Y. Ait-Sahalia and L. Hansen.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gouriéroux, C., and A. Monfort. 1996. Simulation-based
econometric methods. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gouriéroux, C., A. Monfort, and E. Renault. 1993. Indirect
inference. Journal of Applied Econometrics 8:
S85–S118.
Hansen, G.D. 1985. Indivisible labor and the business
cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 16: 402–417.
Johnston, J. 1984. Econometric methods. 3rd edn. New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Keane, M., and A.A. Smith, Jr. 2003. Generalized indirect
inference for discrete choice models. Working paper.
Yale University.
Smith, A.A., Jr. 1990. Three essays on the solution and
estimation of dynamic macroeconomic models. Doctoral dissertation. Duke University.
Smith, A.A. Jr. 1993. Estimating nonlinear time-series
models using simulated vector autoregressions. Journal of Applied Econometrics 8: S63–S84.

