[Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Dummy Endogenous Regressors:
Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice]: Comment
Author(s): Petra Todd
Source: Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Jan., 2001), pp. 25-27
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392536
Accessed: 07-03-2019 22:29 UTC
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392536?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Business & Economic Statistics

This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Todd:

Comment

25

4. CONCLUSIONS
and
disti
ing
particular
an
Practitioners of applied microeconometrics will find
the
ability
to
ex
the time invested in a careful reading of Angrist's arti
mation
strategies
sizable returns, not merely because of the analytical an
applied
researche
ceptual insights it offers but ultimately also because it
I
might
suggest
gests a variety of important practical innovations that a
quantile
causal
an
researchers can exploit empirically to more clearly unde
the
latter
relies
o
the nature of causal relationships in their data. Applied
is
perhaps
overso

quantile

and

researchers in areas like health, labor, development,
policy-relev

finance, and such work commonly with data wherein (
ordinates
come measures are limited--often most importantly be
ers
to
offer
more
they are nonnegative with mass points at 0-and (b) the
What
factors
cau
of conditioning covariates (X's) are most conveniently su
more
than
two
d
rized via regression methods. Angrist's article provides a
individuals
to
uti
researchers so endowed with a set of powerful tools fo
uct? What factors cause second earners to work more than
iting causal inferences from such data. Of course, the p
17 hours per week? Each of these concerns an important
line is familiar and inevitable: All bets are off without t
real-world causal question for which the application-specific
retically solid instruments. But with such instruments in
specific

ordinate-whether for institutional, legal, physiological, or

the strategies exposited by Angrist offer analysts a rich
other reasons-is a fundamental "pivot point" for the analysis.
perspectives on estimation.
Analysis of such distile relationships-whether in causal or in

reduced-form settings-is a potentially powerful method for
informing decision makers, and it seems to me that its mer-

ADDITIONAL REFERENCE

Wooldridge, J. M. (1999), "Estimating Average Partial Effects Under Con-

its relative to quantile analyses would have to be judged on ditional
a
Moment Independence Assumptions," mimeo, Michigan State

case-by-case basis.

University, Dept. of Economics.

Comment
Petra TODD

Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 (petra@athona.sas.upenn.ed
This article considers ways of estimating the effectreceived
of
some treatment and having received no treatment (or
binary, endogenous regressors in models with limited depenpossibly a different treatment). For each individual, only one
dent variables. It questions the usefulness of conventional
of the potential outcome states is observed, which leads to a
estimation strategies aimed at recovering structural model
missing-data problem in attempting to draw inferences about
parameters and advocates the use of simple instrumental variaspects of the treatment effect distribution.
ables (IV) estimators as an alternative, on the grounds that
The language of potential outcomes is very general, so

these estimators invoke weaker assumptions and often suffice
almost any economic problem could be formulated in these

to answer questions of interest in empirical studies. Interms.
the However, this does not mean that estimators proposed
author's view, the main challenge facing empirical researchers
in the literature for the causal model are useful for all or even
is the problem of identification of "treatment effects" through
most economic problems. A major limitation of the model
IV. Here, I expand the discussion by considering two quesis that it assumes that the state "with treatment" has been

tions: (1) What are the limitations of the causal modelobserved
as
for at least a subset of people. In medical trials or
a paradigm for policy analysis? (2) When simple estimators
biological experiments, this assumption is probably reason-

are suitable for answering a question of interest, what are able,
the but in economics we often are interested in evaluating
effects of treatments that have not yet been implemented. For

trade-offs that need to be considered in using them?

1. WHEN IS THE "CAUSAL MODEL" A USEFUL
PARADIGM FOR POLICY ANALYSIS?

example, we might be interested in predicting the effect of

raising the age receiving Social Security benefits to a new age
or the effect of introducing new term limits on welfare participation. An implicit assumption needed to apply any of the
The article gives the impression that most interesting questions in economics can be answered within the context of
identification results described in this article is that both Y,

the "causal model" [variously attributed to Neyman (1923),
Fisher (1935), Cox (1958), Roy (1951), and Rubin (1978)].
The causal model is a very general framework that assumes

? 2001 American Statistical Association

Journal of Business & Economic Statistics

that there are potential outcome states, associated with having
This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

January 2001, Vol. 19, No. 1

26 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, January 2001

may be wrong,
resulting
in biased estimates.
view is
and Yo are observed, which would
not
be satisfied
in This
many

cases. Thus, the causal model
andfor
the
estimators
developed
expressed,
example,
in the discussion of
the two-part

for it are inadequate when it
comes
to
any the
economic
question
model.
The article
advocates
use of a two-part
approach
involving a state of the world
that
has not
been observed.
instead
of a conventional
selection-model
approach, maintainDespite these limitations, treatment
effect
estimates
ing that the two-part
approach is
less likely to lead are
to biased
sometimes used to predict consequences
of new
treatments
or
parameter estimates because
it does not
impose cross-equation
restrictions
as a conventional tobit estimator
would. the policy
of existing treatments for new
populations.
When

change being considered is very
close
to
changes
observed
How do researchers
decide
whether
or not to impose
restricin the data and is to be applied
to
similar
individuals,
tions across estimating equations that are structurally linked?then
extrapolation may be reasonable.
But approach
if the
policy
change
is
The most agnostic
would
be to estimate
both equa(a) of a magnitude outside the
range
of
experience,
(b)
along
tions completely nonparametrically, but this approach is rarely

a new dimension, or (c) intended
a new
population,
then
it
practical.for
Nonparametric
estimators
are consistent under
the
is an open question as to how
reliable
the
estimates
would
be.
most general conditions, but in conventional size samples the
Treatment impact estimates standard
are not
intended
capture
anyerrors would
be so large thatto
the estimates
would for
thing invariant to changing practical
conditions.
The
assumptions
purposes be useless. Researchers impose structurethat
would be required to justify because
extrapolations
or
they are willing to restrict
thegeneralizations
class of models under

are often quite strong. To some
extent,
it
is an
illusion
that
which their
estimators are
consistent
in exchange
for greater
these estimators allow for general
kinds
of
inference
under
precision. These efficiency considerations would also apply in
weak assumptions because the
required
to restricjustify
theassumptions
deciding whether or not to
impose cross-equation
their application for particular
purposes
are
often
not
tions in estimating simultaneous-equations models. If we made
are
explicit.
right about the structure, there is an efficiency gain from
Angrist argues that the identification results for the local
imposing the restrictions. If we are wrong, imposing them may
average treatment effect (LATE) estimator provide a "foundalead to bias. When there are overidentifying restrictions, it is
tion for credible causal inference" (p. 5) and a "minimum conat least possible to develop tests of the model specification that
troversy jumping-off point for any prediction exercise" (p. 5).
can serve as a guide in choosing a structural model that is supBut as discussed previously, the causal model maintains such
ported by the data. This article presents a dichotomy between
a high level of generality that it offers little guidance for many

kinds of problems. It is important to recognize when and when

not the LATE estimator is likely to be useful. This article
claims that "in practice, estimates of LATE differ little from
estimates based on the stronger assumptions invoked to iden-

tify effects on the entire treated population" (p. 5). But such
an extrapolation is not justified under the theory and is surely

unlikely to hold in all circumstances. As shown in a number of works by various authors, LATE provides the average
effect of treatment for the group of "compliers," who are people induced by the instrument to receive treatment. This group
does not, except under very special circumstances, correspond

to the group of treated persons and may, in fact, represent
only a small fraction of persons receiving treatment. So, not
only does LATE not suffice for answering problems of the sort
described by (a), (b), and (c), it also does not generally provide the average effect of treatment on the treated-the most
common parameter of interest in analyzing social programs.
Another not-so-attractive feature of the estimator is that the

population of "compliers" is usually not identifiable, so we
cannot say exactly whose treatment impact is being estimated.

Applying the LATE parameter estimate to the full population
of treated persons would generally require ruling out certain
types of heterogeneity in individual responses to treatment,

as discussed by Heckman (1997). The explicit assumptions
that could justify this type of extrapolation were shown by
Heckman and Vytlacil (2000, in press).

the two-part model and a fully parametric, traditional selection specification, but there are many other modeling choices,
ranging from fully nonparametric to semiparametric to fully

parametric. In modest size samples, efficiency is an important consideration and a parametric model may be the most

appropriate one. For very large samples, fewer parametric
approaches are feasible. Both the probability-of-working and
the hours-worked equations could, for example, be estimated

by a semiparametric method, such as semiparametric least
squares (Ichimura 1993). Which estimation method is most
appropriate ultimately depends on how much data is available and how many parameters are to be estimated. It does
not make sense to criticize the use of structured approaches in
favor of more flexible modeling approaches without regard to
the context in which they are being applied.

3. ON THE GAP BETWEEN THEORY AND
EMPIRICAL PRACTICE
Finally, another recurring emphasis in the article is on the
value of shortcuts in empirical practice. In the author's view,

there is a gap between the econometric theory and what is
feasible in practice, and shortcuts and approximations help to
bridge this gap. To this end, the article extols, for example,
the virtues of ordinary least squares (OLS) as a way of approximating any unknown conditional expectation function, without much concern as to whether a best linear approximation is

a good approximation. If the model has discrete regressors and
is fully saturated, it is well known that OLS is equivalent to a
nonparametric estimator. But in other cases, a linear approximation could be highly biased and the bias will not go away
A general theme throughout the article is that whenever
as
the sample size gets large. There are a variety of alternapossible researchers should restrain from imposing paramettive asymptotically unbiased estimators. Along similar lines,
ric restrictions in estimation because the structure they impose
2. ESTIMATORS SHOULD BE TAILORED
TO THEIR APPLICATION

This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Angrist:

the

Reply

27

ADDITIONAL
REFERENCES
article
suggest

observables"

estimat
Cox, D. R. (1958), The Planning of Experiments, New York: Wiley.
weighting
scheme.
Fisher, R. A. (1935), Design of Experiments, London: Oliver and Boyd.
because
failure
to
t
Heckman, J. J. (1997), "Instrumental Variables: Evidence
From Evaluating
very
different
esti
Job Training Programme," Journal of Human Resources,
32, 441-462.
Heckman, J.,
Ichimura, H., and Todd,
P. (1997), "Matching as an
Econometric
estimator
of
the
pa
Evaluation Estimator:discusse
Theory and Evidence on its Performance Applied
Todd
(1998)
to the JTPA Program, Part I. Theory and Methods," Review of Economi
cult
to
implement
a
Studies, 64, 605-654.
Finally,
the
append
(1998), "Matching as an Econometric Evaluation," Review of Ecoobtaining
estimates
nomic Studies,
65, 261-294.
to
inconsistent
esti
Heckman, J., and Vytlacil, E. (2000), "Causal Parameters,
Structural Equa
tions, Treatment Effects and Randomized Evaluations
of Social Programs,"i
approximations
or
unpublished
manuscript, University
of Chicago, Dept. of Economics.
fulness.
I
do
think

based

on

standard

(in press), "Local Instrumental Variables," in Nonlinear Statistical

simple

IV

Inference: Essays in Honor of Takeshi Amemiya, eds. C. Hsiao, K
errors
that

Morimune, and J. Powell, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

estimated
paramete
Ichimura, H. (1993), "Semiparametric Least Squares (SLS) and Weighted SL
in
reporting
incorre
Estimation of Single Index Models,"
Journal of Econometrics, 58, 71-120
that
it
saves
time
i
Neyman, J. (1923), "Statistical Problems
in Agricultural Experiments," Sup
plement to the Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, 2, 107-180.
several
works
long
W. (1984), "A Methodsolving
of Moments Interpretation of Sequential Est
ple
waysNewey,of
mators," Economic Letters, 14, 201-206.
1984).
Although
th
Roy, A. (1951), "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford
developed
in
the
th
Economic Papers, 3, 135-146.
mators
as
this

used
in
the
Rubin, D. (1978), "Baysian Inference
for Causal Effects:
The Role of Ranarticle
supp
domization," The Annals of Statistics, 6, 34-58.

Reply
Joshua D. ANGRIST
I thank the discussants and the session organizer, outgoing
the notion that observational studies should try to mimic the
JBES editor Jeff Wooldridge, who will be missed by associate
sort of controlled comparisons generated by experiments.
editors and JBES authors alike. The comments in this session Imbens. Imbens begins by endorsing the view that the sub-

offer a variety of viewpoints, some sympathetic, others more
stantive goals of empirical research are better served by the
critical. I am pleased to be part of this stimulating and conpotential outcomes/causal framework than by structural modstructive exchange and look forward to more interaction of
eling. Going one step further, Imbens notes that the problems
this type in the future.
with "model-first econometrics" are not limited to LDV's. In

Hahn. My article starts by suggesting that a focus the
on same spirit, he sensibly wonders (as did Wooldridge 1992)
treatment effects simplifies the problem of causal inference
why so much attention has been devoted to estimating the
in limited dependent variable (LDV) models with endogeBox-Cox transformation model, which does not actually idennous regressors. Endogeneity's half-sister is the assumption
tify E[YIX] without a distributional assumption. Imbens also
of unobserved individual effects, since the omitted-variables
nicely articulates the rationale for looking at the twins exam-

motivation for fixed effects in panel data is similar. Hahn

ple and notes that this is similar to the rationale for extrapasks whether a shift in focus from index parameters to averolating from clinical trials in narrow subpopulations. And, in
age causal effects might also simplify the notoriously diffifact, I believe the "twins experiment" is likely to have precult problem of working with nonlinear models for binary
dictive value in a variety of situations, though any extrapo-

panel data (e.g., as in Card and Sullivan 1988). Hahn shows

lation will probably be improved by control for demographic
that here too the causal-effects framework pays off, demoncharacteristics.
strating that average causal effects are easily estimated in a
In spite of (or perhaps because of!) our years of discussion
fixed-effects probit model with a binary regressor even though
and collaboration, Imbens and I still do not agree on certain
the probit coefficient is not. A second noteworthy feature
things. He feels strongly that inference with discrete outcomes
of Hahn's comment is his observation that identification in
should use models and procedures that respect inherent nonthis framework turns on careful modeling of the relationship
between the assignment variable and the fixed effects. Traditional econometric models are primarily concerned with the
? 2001 American Statistical Association
stochastic process generating outcomes. A shift of attention
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics
toward modeling the assignment mechanism is consistent with
January 2001, Vol. 19, No. 1
This content downloaded from 134.174.144.116 on Thu, 07 Mar 2019 22:29:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

