Adjusting for Nonignorable Drop-Out Using Semiparametric Nonresponse Models:
Comment
Author(s): Mark van der Laan
Source: Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 94, No. 448 (Dec., 1999), pp.
1125-1127
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of the American Statistical Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2669926
Accessed: 21-10-2019 14:54 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of the American Statistical Association

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1126 Journal of the American Statistical Association, December 1999

CAR, but now Ol will no longer be identifiable. The authors'

not strike me as unreasonable, I would have been satisfied

proposed methodology is developed for such nonparamet-

with a locally efficient data analysis assuming a Cox pro-

ric CAR models. They develop estimators and confidence

portional hazards model for the drop-out mechanism with

intervals for a range of given s'S, provide the implied sen-

time-dependent covariates including subjects' CD4 counts.

sitivity plots, and mention that "when possible, one should

The authors' nonparametric sensitivity analysis assumes for

try to leave the laws of X and AO completely unspecified

a fixed known Ol that

and perform a sensitivity analysis." Thus the authors prefer

such a nonparametric sensitivity analysis assuming a more

AQ (t I V (T) ) = Ato (t, V (t) ) exp (alY)

parametric censoring or full-data model and estimating Ol

accordingly, because it is their belief that a secure scientific basis for model assumptions is rarely available. How-

for some unspecified AO, which corresponds with assuming

ever, they do want to rely on scientific experts to obtain a

model A(oa), and they estimate the distribution of Y under

plausible range of Ol values as needed in the nonparametric
sensitivity analysis.
I find the nonparametric sensitivity analysis attractive because it determines the sensitivity toward deviations from
CAR under minimal assumptions. But relying on the needed
scientific knowledge to obtain a plausible range of Ol values
might be more problematic than making certain model assumptions on either the full data or the censoring law. The
other extreme is to assume a parametric model for the censoring mechanism so that Ol is identifiable from the data, as
done by Rotnitzky et al. (1998). There is no win-win situation, because the latter method might yield biased infer-

ence due to misspecification of the censoring mechanism. I
propose using a lower-dimensional model for the censoring

mechanism to data adaptively obtain a plausible range of Ol
values for the nonparametric sensitivity analysis. This plausible range will be correct if the lower-dimensional model

is correct and typically will be overly optimistic when the
lower-dimensional model is wrong, but still provides some-

thing to work with. To be concrete, I consider the ACTG
175 trial as analyzed in the article. I argue that to make this
nonparametric sensitivity analysis approach practical, one

will need to provide data-adaptive ways to provide such a
plausible range of Ol values.
In each of the four treatment arms of the ACTG 175

trial, each subject's CD4 count process is observed up till

the minimum of 56 weeks and the subject's drop out time
Q. In addition, one observes baseline covariates such as
the IV drug user status of the subject. The observed data
structure is a monotone censored-data structure in the sense

that the amount of information one observes on a subject
increases over time; formally, the sigma fields FQ gener-

ated by (Q A 56, V(Q A 56)) are increasing in Q. If one
is willing to assume coarsening at random-that is, that

this model A(ca). This analysis is repeated for a plausible
range of values oa. Because it is already very hard to un-

derstand why CAR would be violated in this application,
it will be much harder to determine a plausible range of Ol
values. However, it might be easy to reason that s'S smaller
than a given ? cannot be excluded as a possibility, so that

an extremely sensitive sensitivity plot would send a warning that I would have not known of without the sensitivity
analysis.

Each of the models A(ca) identifies the distribution of
Y and is nonparametric. The advantage of nonparametri-

cally identified models is that the conclusions of a sensi-

tivity analysis are not affected by misspecification of the
observed data model. On the other hand, because all models A(ca) for various Ol are nonparametric, the data cannot
distinguish between different A(ca)'s. Thus in each application one needs a certain type of expert who can provide a
plausible range of Ol values. This requires experts who can

tell to what degree a person with a given covariate history
up to time t bases his or her decision to drop out at time t
on his or her future CD4 count value. One might wonder if
such experts exist.
As pointed out by the authors, one can choose different
types of sensitivity models for the drop-out mechanism, and

it makes sense to choose the one that is easiest to interpret
with regard to oa. However, whatever model one selects, the
experts' minimal task will still be to determine with respect to some measure to what degree subjects' drop-out
time behavior deviates from CAR. In addition, because the

conclusions (the sensitivity plot) depend on the choice of
sensitivity model, in principle even the choice of sensitivity model should be determined by a so-called expert. The
true sensitivity parameter is not al, but in fact is the whole

function r(Y, V(t), ae), which makes the task of the expert
even harder.

AQ(dtIV(56)) = AQ(dtIV(t)) for t < Q-then the Finally,
re-

sults in the appendixes of Robins (1993) and Robins and

because the estimators of [t(al) are IPCW esti-

mators, even when one succeeds in determining a set of

Rotnitzky (1992) provide closed-form locally efficient es-

plausible Ol values, the estimators might break down for

timators of, for example, the distribution function of Y =

values of Ol within this range. In that case one would need

CD4(56). These estimators rely on an estimator of the dropto conclude for these plausible values of Ol that [t(al) is not
out mechanism AQ.
identifiable (for the given sample size).
Would this analysis be appropriate? In other words, is it
Thus in many applications it is likely that the desired
reasonable to assume that the decision of a subject to drop
expert knowledge is not available. Then the data analyst
out of the study at time t only depends on the subject's

who is concerned about the censoring mechanism not being

past CD4 count history and possibly other measured vari-

ignorable will need other tools to get a plausible range of Ol

ables? The latter assumption corresponds in the authors'

values in another manner. Assuming, as the authors need to

notation with model A(O). Because this assumption does

do to fight the curse of dimensionality, a Cox proportional

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

van

der

Laan:

Comment

hazards model for AO-that is,

Ao(dt, V(t)) Ao(dt) exp(-yZ(t)), (1)

1127

Suppose that the nonparametric model used in the sen-

sitivity analysis models the dependence of A0o(tlV(t)) on
V(t) by extracting from the CD4 past several covariates.

with Z(t) a function of V(t))-the observed data model

Suppose now that we fit a lower-dimensional nested model

with Ol known is not nonparametric anymore, so that for,

that simply sets the coefficients in front of several of these

a sufficiently low-dimensional Z(t), a will be identifiable

covariates equal to 0; for example, this model might include

from the data. For example, in the ACTG 175 trial it would
be of interest to estimate Ol when assuming model 1. Be-

cause Ol is only one-dimensional, the authors' argument that
Ol might still be extremely hard to identify in the ACTG 175
trial needs to be proved and very well might not hold.

Consider this latter model with Ol being a parameter. The
class of estimating equations for ([u, y, c) can be derived as
in the Appendix of the article by determining the orthogonal

complement of the nuisance tangent space of ([u, -y, a). In
fact, the authors already determined the orthogonal comple-

ment of the nuisance tangent space of (u, y) in the model

only CD4(t) as covariate. If this lower-dimensional model
is correct, then the corresponding confidence interval for

Ol gives a plausible range of Ol values for the more nonparametric model. Because there is no perfect solution, it
makes sense to be satisfied with such a guessed plausible
range of Ol values. To make the analysis more sophisticated,

one could obtain such confidence intervals for Ol for a nested
sequence of models, so that one also obtains an idea about
how strong the confidence intervals of Ol depends on the

actual assumed model for Ao(t, V(t)).
This suggests the following nonparametric sensitivity

with Ol known. Thus one simply subtracts from each element in this latter space the projection on the score of Ol

analysis procedure.

to obtain the class of estimating equations for ([u, ). However, this does not yield yet the estimating equation for
Ol, but determining the orthogonal complement of the nuisance tangent space of Ol will not be a harder task than

the work the authors have already carried out. This results
in a set of estimating equations for ([u, -y, ) that still re-

1. Select a lower-dimensional model for Ao(t, V(t))
nested in the actual used model for Ao(t, V(t)).
2. Estimate (ce, ,u, ) simultaneously. Use the .95% confidence interval for Ol as the plausible range of Ol values in
the next step.

3. For the more nonparametric model for Ao(t,V(t)),
quires estimating of the nuisance parameter AO. However,
carry out a sensitivity analysis as in the article.
for a given (-y, ae), we can still estimate the baseline hazard
AO as in the article. Thus this gives a complete set of esti- Note that this data-adaptive approach of obtaining a plaumating equations for all unknown parameters ([u, y, a, Ao).

In this manner one can obtain an confidence interval for

the true al, and there would then be no need for expert
knowledge.

This approach is against the authors' philosophy, because

sible range of Ol values still allows using expert knowledge.

Namely, if experts have strong knowledge on the censoring
mechanism, one can use that knowledge to select a lower-

dimensional model for Ao(tlV(t)) in step 1.

they really want to aim at a nonparametric model for AO.
The only reason that they select in their data analysis a

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES

Cox model for AO is that it is needed to make estimators

Gill, R. D., van der Laan, M. J., and Robins, J. M. (1997), "Coarsening

available at all, but their goal is to choose the model as
nonparametric as sample size allows, though this philosophy of selecting as nonparametric model as sample size

at Random, Characterizations, Conjectures and Counter-Examples," in
Proceedings of the First Seattle Symposium in Biostatistics 1995, eds.
D. Y. Lin and T. R. Fleming, New York, Springer-Verlag, pp. 255-294.

Jacobsen, M., and Keiding, N. (1995), "Coarsening at Random in General

allows is not carried out in the data analysis, I believe. In

Sample Spaces and Random Censoring in Continuous Time," The Annals

that case they should have modeled the effect of more com-

of Statistics, 23, 774-786.

ponents of the past V(t). With such a nonparametric choice

Robins, J. M. (1993), "Information Recovery and Bias Adjustment in Pro-

portional Hazards Regression Analysis of Randomized Trials Using Sur-

of censoring model, they argue that Ol is still not practically

rogate Markers," Proceedings of the Biopharnzaceutical Section, Amer-

identified.

ican Statistical Association, pp. 24-33.

This content downloaded from 206.253.207.235 on Mon, 21 Oct 2019 14:54:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

