International Journal of Epidemiology, 2016, 1904–1908
doi: 10.1093/ije/dyw277
Advance Access Publication Date: 18 November 2016
Symposium

Symposium

Tyler J VanderWeele
Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health
*Corresponding author. 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston MA 02115. E-mail: tvanderw@hsph.harvard.edu
Accepted 20 July 2016

Epidemiology is sometimes described as the study of the distribution and determinants of disease. Tremendous progress
has been made in our understanding of, and in developing
methods to study, such distributions and determinants. The
questions of distribution and of determinants perhaps find
their intersection in the more focused query, ‘For whom?’
For whom, or for what sub-populations, is each particular
determinant relevant? We are led, in other words, to questions of interaction or heterogeneity of effect. And then, if
we probe the study of the determinants of disease further,
we are led to the question of ‘Why?’ Why is this particular
determinant a cause of disease? What are the mechanisms
or pathways that result in an effect? In other words, we are
led to questions of mediation.
Whereas questions of interaction have been present within
epidemiology for decades and, in the historical literature, one
can find numerous methodological papers addressing such
questions, the story within epidemiology is rather different for
mediation. Questions of mechanisms have of course often
been of interest, but formal methods for mediation have until
recently not often been widely discussed or taught within epidemiology. Occasionally tools from the social sciences have
been employed, but formal training on methods for mediation
has until recently been scant. Methodology for both mediation
and interaction have, however, expanded dramatically in the
past decade and have been the focus of much of my own research. It is the various developments in methodology on
mediation and interaction relevant to epidemiology, and to
the social and biomedical science more generally, that I have
attempted to describe in my book Explanation in Causal
Inference: Methods for Mediation and Interaction,1 published

last year, in 2015, by Oxford University Press. The book attempts to move beyond simple inference for cause and effect
to questions of ‘Why?’ and ‘For whom?’, that is to say, to
questions of mediation and interaction.

Content
The book is framed by more general conceptual material in
Chapters 1 and 16. Chapter 1 considers the nature of explanation, and its relation to causation itself, in broader conceptual terms. Different forms of explanation when reasoning
about causation are discussed, along with how the phenomena of mediation and interaction provide different types of
explanations for cause-effect relationships. Discussion is also
provided as to what might motivate a researcher to investigate these phenomena of mediation and interaction empirically. The first chapter concludes with a brief description of
the structure of the remainder book. The final chapter,
Chapter 16, after a brief assessment of what future methodological research development might look like, once again
turns to broader conceptual questions of explanation and
causation and situates some of the discussion in the book
within the philosophical discourse on these issues. It is noted
that the potential outcomes perspective that forms the basis
of the methodologies described in the book, in fact constitutes
within the philosophical literature a subset of broader counterfactual queries, which itself is a subset of questions concerning the nature of causality. Discussion is offered as to the
relation between causation and explanation, natural laws and
human agency, touching upon philosophical ideas concerning
causation from Hume, Aristotle, Lewis and Aquinas.2–7

C The Author 2016; all rights reserved. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the International Epidemiological Association
V

1904

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ije/article-abstract/45/6/1904/2670330 by guest on 21 November 2019

Explanation in causal inference: developments
in mediation and interaction

International Journal of Epidemiology, 2016, Vol. 45, No. 6

ators are of interest. Chapter 6 extends the methodology to
longitudinal data with time-varying exposures and mediators. Chapter 7 addresses a number of more specialized
topics. Finally, Chapter 8 does not consider mediation per
se, but rather addresses a number of different concepts and
methods that are distinct from, but related to and sometimes confused with, mediation. These include instrumental variables, Mendelian randomization, surrogate
outcomes and principal stratification approaches. Each of
these topics is given a short description and relations with
mediation are discussed. Chapters 2–8, taken together,
provide a comprehensive overview of the current state of
methodology for mediation, at least as of the book’s publication in early 2015. Methods have, of course, continued
to develop since, but a reader of these chapters of the book
will be well equipped to assimilate and make use of the
methodology that has developed in the past year since the
book’s publication and likely that which will take place in
the years to come.
Part II of the book, Chapters 9–13, shifts the focus to
the analysis of interaction. Chapter 9 constitutes a reasonably comprehensive overview of conceptual, historical, interpretative and statistical aspects of interaction.
The chapter could, like Chapter 2, be read on its own as a
general tutorial on interaction analysis.9 Chapters 10–13
focus on more specific topics. Chapter 10 discusses socalled sufficient cause interaction, i.e. settings in which
an outcome occurs if both of two exposures are present
but not if only one or the other is present. Such sufficient
cause interaction differs from interaction in a statistical
model, and the chapter presents modern developments on
empirically assessing such sufficient cause interaction, its
relation to mechanisms and the limits of such inference.
Chapter 11 discusses sensitivity analysis methods relevant
for interaction, which are useful in the face of biases such
as unmeasured confounding and measurement error.
Somewhat surprisingly, in a number of contexts, even if
such biases affect estimates of main effects, often interaction estimates are left unbiased. The conditions for this,
and how to correct for biases if they are present, are discussed. Chapter 12 discusses selected issues of interaction
relevant primarily within, but not exclusively restricted
to, a genetic context. Topics include multiple testing,
joint tests for main effects and interaction, and case-only
estimators of interaction. Chapter 13 provides an overview of sample size and power calculations for interaction
analysis, including both additive and multiplicative forms
of interaction, from cohort, case-control and case-only
designs. In this second part of the book, especially in
Chapter 9, some of the material has been well established
for decades but many newer methods and approaches are
also presented throughout.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ije/article-abstract/45/6/1904/2670330 by guest on 21 November 2019

The focus of the book is of course on empirical methodologies rather than philosophy, and the methodological
content (Chapters 2–15) is divided into three main parts: I.
Mediation (Chapters 2-8); II. Interaction (Chapters 9–13);
and III. Synthesis and spillover effects (Chapters 14 and
15). Chapter 2 provides a comprehensive overview of the
recent methods in the causal inference literature for assessing mediation. A number of straightforward regressionbased methods are described, and discussion is also given
to how these relate to methods that have been used for
many decades within epidemiology and in the social sciences, such as the Baron and Kenny approach.8 Essentially,
the new methods in the causal inference literature allow
for much greater model flexibility and allow also for effect
decomposition of a total effect into a direct and indirect effect even in the presence of interaction between the exposure and the mediator or other non-linearities. When such
interaction is absent, the new methods in many cases effectively collapse to the more traditional approaches. The
new methods constitute a generalization of the traditional
approaches; the conditions under which the traditional
approaches fail and when they are appropriate is discussed.
Throughout, emphasis is placed on the assumptions needed
to interpret estimates from statistical models causally as
direct and indirect effects. This second chapter of the
book, which forms the book’s core mediation chapter,
aims both to provide the conceptual foundation for modern approaches to mediation and also to equip the reader
with a set of practical tools. The chapter includes descriptions of software available in SAS, Stata, SPSS and R to
carry out the types of analyses described. The chapter
could be read on its own as an introduction to modern
methods for mediation analysis.
Chapters 3–7 address a number of further topics in mediation analysis. Chapter 3 describes sensitivity analysis
techniques for assessing how sensitive one’s conclusions
concerning mediation are to violations in the assumptions
being made. Because the assumptions needed to assess mediation and pathways are quite strong, it is argued in the
book that every mediation analysis ought to be accompanied by a sensitivity analysis. This is neglected in much of
the research employing methods for mediation in the social
and biomedical sciences, but analyses can be very misleading if assumptions are violated, and some dramatic examples of this are presented. If all mediation analyses were
accompanied by sensitivity analysis, our inferences about
pathways and mechanisms would be on much firmer footing. Several practical approaches to carrying out sensitivity
analysis are provided. The remaining chapters on mediation cover more specialized topics. Chapter 4 extends the
methods for mediation to time-to-event outcomes. Chapter
5 extends this further to settings in which multiple medi-

1905

1906

opments. Although some of the methods presented in the
latter parts of the book are relatively advanced, the vast
majority of the book was written to be accessible to anyone familiar with linear and logistic regression. Effort was
made to relegate as many of the technical details as possible to an appendix at the book’s end. The appendix itself
contains more results, definitions and proofs, which may
be of interest to statisticians and methodologists, but none
of this is essential to the book’s primary content. That primary content is meant to provide a clear, accurate, and
relatively accessible introduction to modern methods to assess mediation and interaction so as to empirically address
questions of explanation in causal inference.

Motivation
A topic that is addressed in Chapter 1 and recurs throughout the book concerns the motivations for studying questions of mediation and interaction. A number of examples
are given to illustrate the various methodologies. The examples are drawn from perinatal, genetic, social, psychiatric and infectious disease epidemiology, as well as
various other disciplines. In some of these the applications,
the relevant methodology gives important insight into scientific or policy-relevant questions. In other cases, the examples serve more as simple illustrations of the
methodology. As noted in the book’s preface, some of the
methodology presented is quite new and there were limited options from which to find an ideal example.
Nevertheless, emphasis is placed throughout on trying to
clarify the motivations for studying mediation and
interaction.
Methods for mediation can be useful for a number of
purposes. Some potential uses of these ideas and methods
include trying to: understand aetiology; provide evidence
to confirm and refute theory; assess the impact of intervening on a mediator when it is not possible to alter an exposure; understand why an intervention succeeded or failed.
The different motivations are illustrated by various
examples.
One prominent example which appears several times in
the book involves genetic variants on chromosome 15 that
were found to be associated both with smoking behaviour
and with lung cancer. A question which arose in this context was whether the variants affected lung cancer only because they affected smoking, and smoking itself causes
lung cancer, or whether the variants affected lung cancer
through pathways other than, say, number of cigarettes
smoked per day.15 This question is discussed in Chapter 2
of the book, and is revisited in Chapter 14, to clarify the respective roles of mediation and interaction in understanding these relationships. Another example, addressed in

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ije/article-abstract/45/6/1904/2670330 by guest on 21 November 2019

Part III of the book offers some synthesis of the ideas of
mediation and interaction (in Chapter 14) and also provides an introduction to the notion of spillover effects (in
Chapter 15). More specifically, Chapter 14 considers a
conceptual and empirical approach to assesses the relative
contributions of mediation and interaction simultaneously.
It is shown that an overall effect of an exposure on an outcome, in the presence of a mediator with which the exposure may interact, can be decomposed into four
components of the portion of the effect due to: (i) neither
mediation nor interaction; (ii) just interaction (but not mediation); (iii) just mediation (but not interaction); and (iv)
both mediation and interaction. This four-way decomposition, published very recently in the literature,10 effectively
unites methods that attribute effects to interactions and
methods that assess mediation. The approach can be implemented using standard statistical models, and software
is provided to estimate each of the four components. The
four-way decomposition provides the greatest insight into
how much of an effect is mediated, how much is due to
interaction, how much is due to both mediation and interaction together and how much is due to neither.
Chapter 15 provides an introduction to the topic of
spillover effects. Like mediation and interaction, this topic
is closely related to explanation and mechanism but is discussed somewhat less commonly within epidemiology,
with its being a common topic at present perhaps only
within infectious disease epidemiology. This topic of spillover effects, also sometimes referred to as ‘interference’, is
the phenomenon whereby the exposure of one individual
can affect the outcome of another. Such spillover is common whenever an outcome depends upon social interactions between individuals. The chapter provides an
introduction to methods for assessing spillover effects from
randomized trials and observational studies, and concludes
with a brief introduction to causal inference with social
network data wherein an entire network of individuals
may be related to and influence each other. Many of the
methods and approaches for mediation and interaction
have direct analogues in the spillover effect context, and
these connections are pointed out and discussed. This
chapter might be of greatest interest to infectious disease
epidemiologists, but the methodology is also likely relevant
to researchers in social epidemiology and perhaps well beyond that also. Recent evidence has indicated that phenomena as diverse as smoking cessation and even obesity
may in fact travel through social networks.11–13 Thinking
clearly about such spillover is important in the design and
the assessment of the full impact of potential interventions
and public health programmes.14
The book, taken as a whole, moves the reader through
basic ideas and foundational concepts to very recent devel-

International Journal of Epidemiology, 2016, Vol. 45, No. 6

International Journal of Epidemiology, 2016, Vol. 45, No. 6

benefit most from treatment. Even in settings in which resources are not limited and in which it is possible to intervene on everyone, it may be that a particular intervention
is beneficial for some individuals and harmful for others.
In such cases, it is critical to identify those groups for
whom treatment may be harmful and refrain from treating
such persons. Techniques for assessing so-called ‘qualitative’ or ‘cross-over’ interaction are discussed in Chapter 9
and are useful in this regard. Other more sophisticated
methods based on a large number of covariates can also
help identify groups of individuals who would or would
not benefit, or who would benefit to the greatest extent,
from treatment.
Another reason sometimes given for empirically assessing interaction is that it may give insight into the mechanisms for an outcome. Chapter 10 of the book is devoted to
how the empirical study of interactions can give insight
into the mechanisms for the outcome, and to the limits of
such reasoning. Yet another reason sometimes given for
studying interaction is that leveraging a potential interaction may in fact help increase power in testing for the
overall effect of an exposure on an outcome. In some settings, by jointly testing for a main effect and for an interaction simultaneously, it is possible to detect an overall
effect when a test ignoring the interaction would otherwise
not be able to detect the effect. These topics are covered in
Chapter 12 of the book.
As noted above, one of the motivations for studying
interaction is to identify which subgroups would benefit
most from an intervention when resources are limited.
However, in some settings it may not be possible to intervene directly on the primary exposure of interest, and one
might instead be interested in which other covariates could
be intervened upon to eliminate much or most of the effect
of the primary exposure of interest. In these cases, methods
for attributing effects to interactions, discussed in Chapter
9, can be useful in assessing this and identifying the most
relevant covariates for intervention. For example, as discussed also in Chapter 9 of the book in the context of the
genetic epidemiology example of lung cancer described
above, although it is not possible to intervene directly on
the genetic variants themselves, if we were able to eliminate smoking this would in fact also eliminate almost all of
the effect of the variants. Methods for attributing effects to
interaction can help establish such results.
As with mediation, so also with interaction: the motivations for studying the phenomenon are numerous and diverse, and it is important to clarify the motivation and the
scientific or policy question of interest, as different motivations in fact correspond to different types of effects and
different appropriate methodologies. Interaction can be assessed on different scales; with mediation, different types

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ije/article-abstract/45/6/1904/2670330 by guest on 21 November 2019

Chapter 5, concerns the repeated finding that low socioeconomic status (SES) during childhood is associated with
adverse health outcomes later in life. Debate remains as to
whether this is because low SES during childhood affects
adult SES which in turn affects adult health (a ‘social trajectory’ model), or whether childhood SES affects adult
health through pathways other than through adult SES (a
‘latent effects/sensitive period’ model) or both, and to what
extent. Empirical methods for mediation are used to evaluate some evidence for these different theories.16
Methods for mediation can likewise be of policy relevance in the design and refinement of interventions, even
in the context of randomized trials. An example discussed
in Chapter 3 concerns a randomized trial of a cognitive
therapy intervention17 that was found to have a beneficial
effect on depressive symptoms. However, it was also noted
that the intervention had an effect on the use of antidepressants: those in the cognitive behavioural therapy arm were
more likely to use antidepressants during follow-up. This
led to questions concerning whether the cognitive behavioural therapy intervention had a beneficial effect on depressive symptoms simply because it led to greater
antidepressant use, or whether the intervention affected depressive symptoms through other pathways, e.g. by changing the thought and behavioural patterns of the
participants. If the intervention were only beneficial because of higher use of antidepressants, then the cognitivebehavioural aspects of the intervention could perhaps be
abandoned without much loss and a more cost-effective
intervention, focusing only on antidepressant adherence,
could be developed. Alternatively, it may have been the
case that the intervention was effective both because of
increased antidepressant use and because of cognitivebehavioural changes. Methods for assessing mediation can
again be useful in assessing the relative contribution of
these various pathways. However, as described in the
book’s analysis of this trial, there are also a number of potential problematic pitfalls due the assumptions required to
assess mediation in this example, and here sensitivity analysis techniques turn out to be critical in accurately evaluating the evidence.
There are also a number of practical and theoretical
considerations, discussed in the book, that motivate the
study of interaction. One of the most prominent of these is
that, in a number of settings, resources to implement interventions may be limited. It may not be possible to intervene on or treat an entire population. Resources may only
be sufficient to treat a small fraction. If this is the case,
then it may be important to identify the subgroups of persons for which the intervention is likely to have the largest
effect. Chapter 9 discusses how methods for assessing additive interaction can help determine which subgroups would

1907

1908

of direct and mediated effects can be defined. The different
measures correspond to different types of questions concerning policy and science, and it is thus essential to make
sure that the motivation, the effect of interest and the relevant methodology are clear.

Concluding remarks

i. We know far more about appropriate empirical methodologies to assess mediation and interaction than we
did a decade ago. Methodology has expanded dramatically in the past 10 years and can be used to assess
these phenomena in a variety of settings that were not
previously possible.
ii. With mediation especially, but with interaction to a certain extent also, empirical inferences are difficult and subject to numerous pitfalls, even more so than is the case
for examining simple cause-and-effect relationships.
When we examine these questions of mechanisms, we
are making more nuanced inferences requiring additional
assumptions, and it is thus essential that we investigate
the sensitivity of our conclusions to the assumptions
being made; sensitivity analysis can assist with this.
iii. There are numerous motivations for studying the phenomena of mediation and interaction, and the methods
can be used in a variety of contexts. However, clarifying why the relevant methodology is being employed,
what the substantive question is and how it maps onto
the specific effect of interest is essential, since the methodology can also be employed to generate estimates
that will likely have little scientific or policy relevance.
Further methodological developments on these topics are
likely to take place in the years ahead, but much has been accomplished already and some of the foundational approaches
are perhaps unlikely to change. The methodological toolkit
has seen dramatic expansion in these areas; many of the
methods are new. What remains to be seen perhaps is the extent to which they will be useful. This will depend in part on
adoption and dissemination, in part on correct use, in part on

careful mapping of questions to relevant effects and methodologies, in part on assessing sensitivity to assumption violations and, perhaps more fundamentally, on the extent to
which the epidemiological questions of greatest significance
truly require assessment of mediation and interaction to address. Careful delineation of when various mechanistic considerations are, or are not, relevant will be an important
undertaking in the years to come. It is my hope that the book
will help in some small way with this task.

Funding
This research was funded by United States NIH grant R01
ES017876.
Conflict of interest: None declared.

References
1. VanderWeele TJ. Explanation in Causal Inference: Methods for
Mediation and Interaction. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press, 2015.
2. Aristotle. (384-322 BCE). Physics.
3. Aristotle. (384-322 BCE). Metaphyics.
4. Aquinas T. (1225-1274). Summa Theologica.
5. Hume D. (1739). A Treatise of Human Nature.
6. Hume, D. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.
Reprint. LaSalle, IL: Open Court Press, 1958.
7. Lewis D. Counterfactuals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1973.
8. Baron RM, Kenny DA. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. J Pers Soc Psychol 1986;51:1173-82.
9. VanderWeele TJ, Knol MJ. A tutorial on interaction. Epidemiol
Methods 2014;3:33-72.
10. VanderWeele TJ. A unification of mediation and interaction: a
four-way decomposition. Epidemiology 2014;25:749-61.
11. Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The spread of obesity in a large social
network over 32 years. N Engl J Med 2007;357:370–79.
12. Christakis NA, Fowler JH The collective dynamics of smoking in
a large social network. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2249-58.
13. VanderWeele TJ. Sensitivity analysis for contagion effects in social networks. Sociol Methods Res 2011;40:240–55.
14. VanderWeele TJ, An W. Social networks and causal inference.
In: Morgan SL (ed). Handbook of Causal Analysis for Social
Research. New York,NY: Springer, 2013.
15. VanderWeele TJ, Asomaning K, Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ et al.
Genetic variants on 15q25.1, smoking and lung cancer: An assessment of mediation and interaction. Am J Epidemiol
2012;175:1013–20.
16. Nandi A, Glymour MM, Kawachi I, VanderWeele TJ. Using
marginal structural models to estimate the direct effect of adverse childhood social conditions on onset of heart disease, diabetes and stroke. Epidemiology 2012;23:223-32.
17. Strong V, Waters R, Hibberd C et al. Management of depression
for people with cancer (SMaRT oncology 1): A randomised trial.
Lancet 2008;372:40-48.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ije/article-abstract/45/6/1904/2670330 by guest on 21 November 2019

Taken as a whole, the book provides a comprehensive up-todate treatment of contemporary methods to empirically assess
the phenomena of mediation and interaction, from introductory material to very recent developments. Attention is given
to both conceptual foundations and statistical tools. Software
is provided; methodology is illustrated by example; motivations are discussed; future directions are noted; and although
the book focuses on methodology, the content is also placed
within a broader philosophical context.
The main theses of the book, perhaps more implicit
throughout rather than explicitly made central, might be
summarized as follows.

International Journal of Epidemiology, 2016, Vol. 45, No. 6

